---
title: Sermon 1 - The Creation of Earth and Sky
description: In this sermon, Imam Ali recalls the creation of Earth and Sky and the birth of Adam.
---
Praise is due to Allah whose worth cannot be described by speakers, whose bounties cannot be counted by calculators and whose claim (to obedience) cannot be satisfied by those who attempt to do so, whom the height of intellectual courage cannot appreciate, and the divings
of understanding cannot reach; He for whose description no limit has been laid down, no
eulogy exists, no time is ordained and no duration is fixed.
He brought forth creation through His Omnipotence, dispersed winds through His
Compassion, and made firm the shaking earth with rocks.
The foremost in religion is the acknowledgement of Him, the perfection of acknowledging
Him is to testify Him, the perfection of testifying Him is to believe in His Oneness, the
perfection of believing in His Oneness is to regard Him Pure, and the perfection of His purity
is to deny Him attributes, because every attribute is a proof that it is different from that to
which it is attributed and everything to which something is attributed is different from the
attribute.
Thus whoever attaches attributes to Allah recognises His like, and who recognises His like
regards Him two; and who regards Him two recognises parts for Him; and who recognises
parts for Him mistook Him; and who mistook Him pointed at Him; and who pointed at Him
admitted limitations for Him; and who admitted limitations for Him numbered Him.
Whoever said in what is He, held that He is contained; and whoever said on what is He held
He is not on something else. He is a Being but not through phenomenon of coming into being.
He exists but not from non-existence. He is with everything but not in physical nearness.
He is different from everything but not in physical separation.
He acts but without connotation of movements and instruments. He sees even when there is
none to be looked at from among His creation. He is only One, such that there is none with
whom He may keep company or whom He may miss in his absence.

The Creation of the Universe
He initiated creation most initially and commenced it originally, without undergoing
reflection, without making use of any experiment, without innovating any movement, and
without experiencing any aspiration of mind. He allotted all things their times, put together
their variations gave them their properties, and determined their features knowing them before
creating them, realising fully their limits and confines and appreciating their propensities and
intricacies.
When Almighty created the openings of atmosphere, expanse of firmament and strata of
winds, He flowed into it water whose waves were stormy and whose surges leapt one over the
other.
He loaded it on dashing wind and breaking typhoons, ordered them to shed it back (as rain),
gave the wind control over the vigour of the rain, and acquainted it with its limitations. The
wind blew under it while water flowed furiously over it.
Then Almighty created forth wind and made its movement sterile, perpetuated its position,
intensified its motion and spread it far and wide. Then He ordered the wind to raise up deep
waters and to intensify the waves of the oceans. So the wind churned it like the churning of
curd and pushed it fiercely into the firmament throwing its front position on the rear and the
stationary on the flowing till its level was raised and the surface was full of foam.
Then Almighty raised the foam on to the open wind and vast firmament and made therefrom
the seven skies and made the lower one as a stationary surge and the upper one as protective
ceiling and a high edifice without any pole to support it or nail to hold it together. Then He
decorated them with stars and the light of meteors and hung in it the shining sun and effulgent
moon under the revolving sky, moving ceiling and rotating firmament.

The Creation of the Angels
Then He created the openings between high skies and filled them with all classes of His
angels. Some of them are in prostration and do not kneel up. Others in kneeling position and
do not stand up.
Some of them are in array and do not leave their position. Others are extolling Allah and do
not get tired. The sleep of the eye or the slip of wit, or languor of the body or the effect of
forgetfulness does not effect them.
Among them are those who work as trusted bearers of His message, those who serve as
speaking tongues for His prophets and those who carry to and fro His orders and injunctions.
Among them are the protectors of His creatures and guards of the doors of the gardens of
Paradise.
Among them are those also whose steps are fixed on earth but their necks are protruding into
the skies, their limbs are getting out on all sides, their shoulders are in accord with the
columns of the Divine Throne, their eyes are downcast before it, they have spread down their
wings under it and they have rendered between themselves and all else curtains of honour and
screens of power. They do not think of their Creator through image, do not impute to Him
attributes of the created, do not confine Him within abodes and do not point at Him through
illustrations.

Description of the Creation of Adam
Allah collected from hard, soft, sweet and sour earth, clay which He dripped in water till it
got pure, and kneaded it with moisture till it became gluey. From it He carved an image with
curves, joints, limbs and segments. He solidified it till it dried up for a fixed time and a known
duration.
Then He blew into it out of His Spirit whereupon it took the pattern of a human being with
mind that governs him, intelligence which he makes use of, limbs that serve him, organs that
change his position, sagacity that differentiates between truth and untruth, tastes and smells,
colours and species.
He is a mixture of clays of different colours, cohesive materials, divergent contradictories and
differing properties like heat, cold, softness and hardness.
Then Allah asked the angels to fulfil His promise with them and to accomplish the pledge of
His injunction to them by acknowledging Him through prostration to Him and submission to
His honoured position. So Allah said:
"Be prostrate towards Adam and they prostrated except Iblis (Satan)." (Qur'an,
2:34; 7:11; 17:61; 18:50; 20:116)
Self-importance withheld him and vice overcame him. So that he took pride in his own
creation with fire and treated contemptuously the creation of clay.
So Allah allowed him time in order to let him fully deserve His wrath, and to complete
(man's) test and to fulfil the promise (He had made to Satan). Thus, He said:
"Verily you have been allowed time till the known Day." (Qur'an, 15:38; 38:81)
Thereafter, Allah inhabited Adam (p.b.u.h.) in a house where He made his life pleasant and
his stay safe, and He cautioned him of Iblis and his enmity. Then his enemy (Iblis) envied his
abiding in Paradise and his contacts with the virtuous.
So he changed his conviction into wavering and determination into weakness. He thus
converted his happiness into fear and his prestige into shame. Then Allah offered to Adam (p.
b.u.h.) the chance to repent, taught him words of His Mercy, promised him return to His
Paradise and sent him down to the place of trial and procreation of progeny.

Allah chooses His Prophets
From his (Adam's) progeny Allah chose prophets and took their pledge for his revelation and
for carrying His message as their trust. In course of time many people perverted Allah's trust
with them and ignored His position and took compeers along with Him. Satan turned them
away from knowing Him and kept them aloof from His worship.
Then Allah sent His Messengers and series of His prophets towards them to get them to fulfil
the pledges of His creation, to recall to them His bounties, to exhort them by preaching, to
unveil before them the hidden virtues of wisdom and show them the signs of His
Omnipotence namely the sky which is raised over them, the earth that is placed beneath them,
means of living that sustain them, deaths that make them die, ailments that turn them old and
incidents that successively betake them.
Allah never allowed His creation to remain without a Prophet deputised by Him, or a book
sent down from Him or a binding argument or a standing plea.
These Messengers were such that they did not feel little because of smallness of their number
or of largeness of the number of their falsifiers. Among them was either a predecessor who
would name the one to follow or the follower who had been introduced by the predecessor.

The Prophethood of Muhammmad
In this way ages passed by and times rolled on, fathers passed away while sons took their
places till Allah deputised Muhammmad (peace be upon him and his progeny) as His Prophet,
in fulfilment of His promise and in completion of His Prophethood.
His pledge had been taken from the Prophets, his traits of character were well reputed and his
birth was honourable. The people of the earth at this time were divided in different parties,
their aims were separate and ways were diverse.
They either likened Allah with His creation or twisted His Names or turned to else than Him.
Through Muhammmad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) Allah guided them out of wrong and with his efforts
took them out of ignorance.
Then Allah chose for Muhammmad, peace be upon him and on his progeny, to meet Him,
selected him for His own nearness, regarded him too dignified to remain in this world and
decided to remove him from this place of trial.
So He drew him towards Himself with honour. Allah may shower His blessing on him, and
his progeny.

The Holy Qur'an and Sunnah
But the Prophet left among you the same which other Prophets left among their peoples,
because Prophets do not leave them untended (in dark) without a clear path and a standing
ensign, namely the Book of your Creator clarifying its permission and prohibitions, its
obligations and discretion, its repealing injunctions and the repealed ones, its permissible
matters and compulsory ones, its particulars and the general ones, its lessons and illustrations,
its long and the short ones, its clear and obscure ones, detailing its abbreviations and
clarifying its obscurities.
In it there are some verses whose knowledge (1) is obligatory and others whose ignorance by
the people is permissible.
It also contains what appears to be obligatory according to the Book (2) but its repeal is
signified by the Prophet's action (sunnah) or that which appears compulsory according to the
Prophet's action but the Book allows not following it.
Or there are those which are obligatory in a given time but not so after that time. Its
prohibitions also differ. Some are major regarding which there exists the threat of fire (Hell),
and others are minor for which there are prospects of forgiveness.
There are also those of which a small portion is also acceptable (to Allah) but they are capable
of being expanded.

In this very sermon he spoke about Hajj
Allah has made obligatory upon you the pilgrimage (hajj) to His sacred House which is the
turning point for the people who go to it as beasts or pigeons go towards spring water. Allah
the glorified made it a sign of their supplication before His Greatness and their
acknowledgement of His Dignity.
He selected from among His creation those who on listening to His call responded to it and
testified His word. They stood in the position of His Prophets and resembled His angels who
surround the Divine Throne securing all the benefits of performing His worship and hastening
towards His promised forgiveness.
Allah the glorified made it (His sacred House) an emblem for Islam and an object of respect
for those who turn to it. He made obligatory its pilgrimage and laid down its claim for which
He held you responsible to discharge it.
Thus, Allah the glorified said:
". . . And (purely) for Allah, is incumbent upon mankind, the pilgrimage to the
House, for those who can afford to journey thither. And whoever denieth then
verily, Allah is Selfsufficiently independent of the worlds" (Qur'an, 3:96).
