al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 ISLAMIC TRANSLATION
SERIES Nahj al-Balaghah The Wisdom and Eloquence of\~l\[ A Parallel
English-Arabic Text COMPILED BY AL-SHARIF AL-RAI;:\>I Edited and
Translated by Tahera Qutbuddin BRILL "People! We live in a challenging
age and a difficult time ...". This is one of the many statements that
still ring true, and it is not surprising that Nahj al-balāghah (The Way
of Eloquence) has remained one of the most revered Arabic texts among
both Sunni and Shiʾi Muslims. These speeches, letters, and sayings
attributed to ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet
Muḥammad, one of the key figures in Islamic his- tory and considered an
outstanding orator, were compiled around ce1000.This volume, with Tahera
Qutbuddin's splendid scholarly edition and masterly translation, is a
major achievement. -- Geert Jan van Gelder, Laudian Professor of Arabic
Emeritus, University of Oxford Translating the sermons and sayings of
Imam ʿAli, "the gate to the city of knowledge," is a momentous task.
Dr. Qutbuddin has not only encapsulated the thoughts and ideas of Imam
ʿAli accurately, but she has also beautifully preserved the fluency,
flow and tempo of Nahj al-Balāghah's sermons and sayings in English
through her selective choice of words and flowing structure. I strongly
recommend this translation to the specialist and casual reader alike. --
Syed Muhammad Rizvi, Principal Director, Shiʿa Research Institute,
Toronto, and Head, Council of Shiʾa Muslim Scholars of North America Few
works in Arabic contain the depth of wisdom and eloquence found in Nahj
al- Balāghah, the fourth-century ah collection of the statements of Imam
ʿAli b. Abi Talib. My journey with the text---published and lauded by
the Egyptian reformer Muhammad Abduh---began more than fifty years ago
at the Beirut Religious Seminary where I was required to memorize
sections to hone my speaking skills; later, at al-Azhar University
inCairo,myprofessorDr.Abdal-HalimMahmoudmademerecitefromasermonformy
oral exams.This new edition of Nahj al-Balāghah, edited by a scholar of
Arabic rhetoric, utilizes the oldest and most reliable manuscripts and
includes an erudite and in-depth introduction, ensuring its place as a
core reference for scholars and researchers. I con- gratulate Professor
Qutbuddin on this outstanding academic achievement. -- Ridwan al-Sayyid,
Dean of the College of Postgraduate Studies and Research, Mohamed Bin
Zayed University for Humanities, Abu Dhabi "Below the speech of the
Creator but above the speech of created beings"---this is how
commentator Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (d. ca. 1258) famously described Nahj
al-Balāghah, rec- ognizingthiscollectionasthepinnacleof
eloquenceintheArabiclanguage.TaheraQut- buddin presents in this volume a
painstaking new edition of this monument of Arabic literature, based on
the oldest and most reliable manuscripts and thorough consider- ation of
the commentarial tradition. Her brilliant translation is faithful to the
original text, precise, and elegant, capturing the force of pithy
aphorisms, the cadence of Arabic oratory, and contemplative reflection
on the trials and tribulations of human experi- ence, the ethical
quandaries of social and political life, and the wonders of the natural
world. -- Devin J. Stewart, Samuel Candler Dobbs Professor of Arabic and
Middle Eastern Stud- ies,andChairof theDepartmentof
MiddleEasternandSouthAsianStudies,EmoryUni- versity al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Nahj al-Balāghah
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Islamic Translation
Series Edited by Ayman Shihadeh volume 15 The titles published in this
series are listed at brill.com/its al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Nahj al-Balāghah The
Wisdom and Eloquence of ʿAlī A Parallel English-Arabic Text Compiled by
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) Edited and translated by Tahera
Qutbuddin leiden \| boston al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 ~~10~y;.J?,~)lt;,/~~\~
\~;c;. ~-;.4~JT\~ \_)\]/ *,, .,. .. *,, .. *,, BRILL This is an open
access title distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license,
which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s)
and source are credited. Further information and the complete license
text can be found at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by‑nc‑nd/4.0/
The terms of the cc license apply only to the original material. The use
of material from other sources (indicated by a reference) such as
diagrams, illustrations, photos and text samples may require further
permission from the respective copyright holder. Free E-Book (pdf)
download is sponsored by the Shi'a Research Institute Open Access Grant
(Toronto), https://shiaresearch.ca Cover illustration: Nahj al-Balāghah
("The Way of Eloquence"). Cover calligraphy by Nihad Nadam, 2023. The
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available online
at https://catalog.loc.gov lc record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2023054675 Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and
Cyrillic scripts: "Brill". See and download: brill.com/brill‑typeface.
issn 2666-3759 isbn 978-90-04-68259-7 (hardback) isbn 978-90-04-68260-3
(e-book) doi 10.1163/9789004682603 Copyright 2024 by Tahera Qutbuddin.
Published by Koninklijke Brill bv, Leiden, The Netherlands. Koninklijke
Brill bv incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Nijhoff, Brill
Schöningh, Brill Fink, Brill mentis, Brill Wageningen Academic,
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Böhlau and V&R unipress. Koninklijke Brill bv
reserves the right to protect this publication against unauthorized use.
This book is printed on acid-free paper and produced in a sustainable
manner. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 قال علي أمير المؤمنين
عليه السلام »العلماء باقون ما بقي الدهر أعيانهم مفقودة وأمثالهم في
القلوب موجودة« Dedicated with deepest gratitude to my revered father,
Syedna Khuzaima Qutbuddin, and to his successor, my revered brother
Syedna Taher Fakhruddin, Dāʿīs of Amīr al-Muʾminīn and disseminators of
his pure knowledge. ∵ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Contents
Acknowledgments xi Abbreviations xiii Introduction 1 Note on the Edition
and Translation: Manuscripts and Methodology 28 Detailed Contents 56
text and translation Nahj al-Balāghah: The Eloquence and Wisdom of ʿAlī
Raḍī's Introduction 98 1 Orations 106 2 Letters 530 3 Sayings 678
Section on Rare Words 752 (cont. Sayings) 760 Raḍī's Conclusion 824
Glossary of Names, Places, and Terms 827 Appendix of Sources for the
Texts of Nahj al-Balāghah 863 Bibliography 914 Index of Names and Places
944 Index of Terms 952 Index of Qurʾan, Hadith, Poetry, and Proverbs 970
فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة والأخلاقيّة (Index of Religious and Ethical
Concepts) 994 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
Acknowledgments I first encountered Ali's wisdom and eloquence in
classes I took as a child
withmylearnedfather,SyednaKhuzaimaQutbuddin.Inearlymorning"sabaq"
sessions in Mumbai, and during community trips to various towns and vil-
lages in India and worldwide, my siblings and I would memorize a saying
and he would explain its life lessons,العلم وراثةكريمة، أغنى الغنى
العقل، المؤمن هَش ٌّ ب َ ش ٌّ ، القناعة مال لا ينفد،and many more. These
texts and lessons sparked an enduring passion, and I began academic work
with Nahj al-Balāghah at Ain Shams University in Cairo, where I wrote my
ma thesis with Professor Ahmad El Naggar on its ethical and historical
themes. Then in my first year in Har- vard's PhD program, Professor Roy
Mottahedeh showed me a facsimile edi- tion of a 5th/11th-century
manuscript owned by the Marʿashi library in Qum. I wrote, they
generously sent me a copy, and that was the beginning of my Nahj
al-Balāghah manuscript collection. I also had enriching conversations
about the text with my distinguished Doktorvater, Professor Wolfhart
Hein- richs, and I contemplated writing my dissertation on Imam Ali's
life and teach- ings before realizing that I needed to go slowly in
approaching such a complex topic. Over the years, I published studies,
critical editions, and translations of Ali's words, including A Treasury
of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and Teach- ings of ʿAli, with the One
Hundred Proverbs, and I continued to gather manu- scripts. Finally in
the past decade, I focused on editing and translating Nahj al-Balāghah.
Throughout my journey, the guidance and blessings of my revered father,
Syedna Khuzaima Qutbuddin, and his eminent son and successor, Syedna
Taher Fakhruddin, have been my source of strength. The prayers showered
by my beloved mother, Sakina busaheba, sustained my courage. My dearest
hus- band, Abduz-Zahir Mohyuddin, gave caring support and excellent
advice, and Hyder, my darling son, supplied love and technological help.
My wonderful and learned Qutbuddin family---especially Syedi Dr Abdeali
bhaisaheb, Syedi Dr Husain bhaisaheb, Dr Aziz bhaisaheb, and Dr
Bazat-Saifiyah behensaheba--- offered insightful ideas. In the project's
final stages, numerous scholars provided generous assis- tance:
Professor Devin Stewart gave detailed feedback on the full document, Dr
Tynan Kelly spent several hundred hours helping to prepare the Appendix
of Sources, my meticulous copy editor Dr Linda S. George waved her magic
wand over my prose, and Dr Hasan Ansari shared ideas and manuscripts.
Many indi- viduals and institutions facilitated the acquisition of
manuscripts from world al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 xii acknowledgments
libraries, including University of Chicago Librarian Dr Marlis Saleh, Dr
Ayse Polat, Professor Robert Gleave, Mr Reza Hemyari, Dr Ali Haider,
Professor Bilal Orfali, the Library of Arabic Literature at nyu-Abu
Dhabi, and the London Alulbayt Foundation. Dr Mahdi Mojtahedi of the
Amir al-Muminin Ali a.s. Spe- cialized Library in Mashhad shared a pdf
of Dr Qays Bahjat Attar's edition with his permission, and Mr Muhammed
Sabbaghi brought me a physical copy from Iran. Professors Ridwan El
Sayyed, James Montgomery, Shawkat Toorawa, and Muhammed Rustom gave
constructive advice, Hatim Zakiyuddin saheb shared various
Ali-relatedTayyibi manuscripts, and my brilliant and enthusiastic Nahj
al-Balāghah seminar students at the University of Chicago offered
perceptive suggestions. Several colleagues answered queries about the
text's dissemina- tion, and I note their contribution in the
Introduction's relevant footnotes. At Brill, senior acquisitions editor
Mr Abdurraouf Oueslati steered the project through its various stages
with perfect kindness and expertise. I am also grateful to Brill's
anonymous reviewer for their positive endorsement, Islamic Translations
series editor Professor Ayman Shihadeh and Brill's Middle East
acquisition editors for accepting my book, Dr Aisha Moussa who paginated
the indexes, Pieter te Velde and Brill's excellent production and
marketing teams, and the Shi'a Research Institute of Toronto who enabled
free download of the e-book pdf by sponsoring Open Access.
Toallwhohelpedwiththisproject,whichissodeartomyheart,Iofferheart- felt
thanks. جزاكم الله خيرًا 28 March, 2024 19 Ramadan, 1445 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Abbreviations A
()آSulaymaniye Aya Sofya manuscript ʿA ʿAbduh's commentary B Baḥrānī's
commentary Ch ()چChester Beatty manuscript D ()دImam Reza Mashhad
manuscript EIr Encyclopaedia Iranica ei2 Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd
edition ei3 Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3rd edition F Ibn Funduq's
commentary fol. folio Gh Mughniyyah's commentary H ()ھRampur Raza
manuscript Ḥ Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd's commentary K ()كSulaymaniye Reisulkuttab
manuscript 2 L ()لMumtaz ul Ulama Lucknow manuscript Q ()قIraqi National
Museum manuscript M ()مMarʿashī manuscript ms, mss manuscript,
manuscripts N ()نNaṣīrī manuscript r recto R Rāwandī's commentary S
()سSulaymaniye Reisulkuttab manuscript 1 Sh ()شShahrastānī manuscript T
()تTopkapi manuscript v verso Y ()يYaʿqūbī Tehran University manuscript
Z ()زMaulana Azad Aligarh manuscript al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera Qutbuddin,
2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_002 This is an open access chapter
distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. Introduction
دون كلام الخالق وفوق كلام المخلوقين "Below the words of the creator and
above the words of his creatures" The eminent Sunni commentator Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd (d. ca. 656/1258) endorsing a common line of praise for ʿAlī's
words.1 Over fourteen centuries, across five continents, and among many
faith denom- inations, scholars and laypeople alike have drawn on the
deep wisdom stored in the eloquent words of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib
(d. 40/661).2 Cousin, son-in-law, and ward of the Prophet Muḥammad, ʿAlī
was the first male to accept Islam, the first Shiʿi Imam, and the fourth
Sunni Caliph. Revered as a sage and religious authority, he is also
lauded as Islam's master orator. ʿAlī's words---including first and
foremost his dazzling orations, as well as his pithy sayings and mag-
isterial letters---span a wide spectrum of preaching, philosophy, and
govern- ment. They offer profound reflections on the majesty of the
creator, fervent warnings on the transience of this world, and urgent
exhortations to prepare for the imminent hereafter. They encompass pious
sermons counseling virtue, earnest directives to cultivate the
intellect, and reverent praise for the Prophet Muḥammad. They animate
rousing battle and political speeches, passionately maintaining
righteousness. They instruct in strict dispatches to tax-collectors,
urging compassion. They inscribe erudite letters to governors, demanding
jus- tice. And they contain a host of timeless maxims offering
religious, pragmatic, and character-building wisdom. All these themes
and more are articulated in 1 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj al-balāghah,
1:24; the same laudation, with some variation in language, is offered by
Rāwandī (d. 573/1177, Shiʿi), Minhāj al-barāʿah, 1:4: "below the words
of God and his Messenger, and above the words of humans" (دون كلام الله
ورسوله وفوق كلام البشر ;)and Muḥammad ʿAbduh (d. 1905, Sunni), SharḥNahj
al-balāghah, 1:6: "the most noble and eloquent of words after the words
of God and the words of his Prophet" (أشرف الكلام وأبلغه بعد كلام الله
تعالى وكلام نبيّه .) 2 The attribution to ʿAlī, here and throughout, is
to be understood in light of complexities dis- cussed in the next
section, "Collection of ʿAlī's Words: Orality, Authenticity, Written
Sources, and Influence on Litterateurs": viz., many of the texts
attributed to ʿAlī are probably genuine remnants, some with
modifications, some even verbatim, but interpolations, modifications,
and texts of later provenance are also likely to be in the mix. To
determine probable authen- ticity, we must assess individual
texts---rather than the compilation as a whole---based on early and wide
provenance and compatibility with the literary and historical milieu of
ʿAlī's time. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 2 introduction
pulsating oral rhythms and vibrant desert-and-camel images within the
pages of the present volume of ʿAlī's words, Nahj al-Balāghah: The
Wisdom and Elo- quenceof
ʿAlī,compiledbytheeminentTwelverShiʿiBaghdadischolar,al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015). Accolades for ʿAlī's words and wisdom would fill
volumes,3 but suffice it to say that friend and foe alike have paid them
homage: ʿAlī's follower Ḍirār ibn Ḍamrah (fl. 1st/7th c.), for example,
declared that "wisdom spoke upon his tongue."4 The chancery head of the
intensely anti-ʿAlid Umayyads, ʿAbd al- Ḥamīd al-Kātib (d. 132/750), who
is venerated as the father of Arabic prose, credited his training in the
art of eloquence to "memorizing the orations of ʿAlī."5The ultimate
tribute is paid in the lines I have cited in the epigraph above, in
which ʿAlī's words are extolled as being "below the words of the creator
and above the words of his creatures." Nahj al-Balāghah is the most
celebrated compilation of ʿAlī's words, and one of the most influential
texts of the Arabic Islamic literary heritage. Widely acclaimed as a
masterpiece of Arabic literature and font of Islamic wisdom, it has been
avidly cited, studied, commented on, and memorized across the Islamic
world continually for more than a thousand years. In this volume, I
present a critical Arabic edition based on the earliest extant
manuscripts, dating from the 5th/11th through the 7th/13th centuries,
three of which were checked against a manuscript authorized by Raḍī
himself, side-by-side with my carefully researched English translation.
For the translation, I took a long, deep dive into the text, along with
a careful reading of its major commentaries and a collation of the
history and literature of the early Islamic period; all the while, I
paid close attention to the graphic imagery that underpins the Arabic
phrases and the parallelism of their pithy cadences. My hope is to have
produced an accurate edition and a lucid translation that captures some
of the depth and brilliance of the original. 3 See collected accolades
by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb Nahj al-balāgha," part 4, passim; ʿAbd al-
Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir Nahj al-balāghah, 1:87--99; ʿUṭāridī, "Introduction" to
his edition of Kaydarī's
commentary,1:5--10,52--53;KeizoghaniandNafchi,"TheGreatnessof
NahjAl-Balagha."Some laudatory statements are quoted later in the
present Introduction. 4 (تنطق الحكمة على لسانه ,)with some variants:
Nuʿmān, Sharḥal-akhbār, 2:391--392; Qālī, Amālī, 2:147; Masʿūdī, Murūj,
2:415; Ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh, 24:402; Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī, Ḥilyat al-
awliyāʾ, 1:84--185; Ibn Ḥamdūn, Tadhkirah, 4:28; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd,
SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 18:225--226. 5 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj
al-balāghah, 1:24. The same report---with "words" instead of
"orations"---is also cited by Jahshiyārī, Wuzarāʾ, 82; Thaʿālibī, Thimār
al-qulūb, 165; Zamakh- sharī, Rabīʿ al-abrār, 4:50; and Ṣafadī, Wāfī,
18:23. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 3 1 ʿAlī
ibn Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661) An appreciation of ʿAlī's renown is essential
for understanding the resounding reception of his compiled words, just
as his biography is essential to contex- tualizing their doctrinal and
political content.6 Since ʿAlī's words collected in the present volume
directly speak to events in his life, a sketch of the main episodes and
actors of his time will help the reader situate their consequence, and a
summary of his legacy will help explain their dissemination. ʿAlī ibn
Abī Ṭālib ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib ibn Hāshim was born around 600ad in
Mecca, according to some reports, inside the Holy Kaaba, to the
Hāshimite chieftain Abū Ṭālib and the Hāshimite noblewoman Fāṭimah bint
Asad. When he was just an infant, his older cousin Muḥammad, an orphan
whom ʿAlī's parents had raised, asked for his charge, and ʿAlī grew up
in the care of the future Prophet of Islam. ʿAlī was approximately ten
years old when Muḥam- mad began his call to the new religion, and he
immediately accepted Islam. He prayed for two years alone with Muḥammad
and Muḥammad's wife Khadījah before others joined the fold. Around
twenty-three at the time of Muḥammad's migration to Medina, ʿAlī played
a vital role in establishing Islam in its nascent stage. His valor in
the battles of Badr, Uḥud, Khaybar, and Khandaq against the Meccans and
their allies would become legendary, as would his sagacity and
erudition. Both Sunni and Shiʿi Muslims recount numerous hadiths from
the Prophet praising ʿAlī, among the most famous of which are the
following: "I am the city of knowledge and ʿAlī is its gateway"; "ʿAlī
is to me as Aaron was to Moses"; and "You, ʿAlī, are my brother in this
world and the next."7 Soon after Muḥammad settled in Medina, ʿAlī
married Muḥammad's youngest daughter, Fāṭimah al-Zahrāʾ, and had four
children with her: Ḥasan, Ḥusayn, Zaynab, and Umm Kulthūm. Muḥammad's
line continued solely through them, and the line through Ḥusayn would
become an important locus for the Shiʿi doctrine of the imamate.
According to the Shiʿa, Muḥammad appointed ʿAlī as his suc- cessor on
18th Dhū al-Ḥijjah in the year 10/632, at the caravan stop of Ghadīr
Khumm, enroute from Mecca to Medina after his last pilgrimage, uttering
the 6 Western studies on ʿAlī'sbiographyinclude Madelung,The Succession
to Muhammad, 141--310; Gleave, "ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib," ei3; Manouchehri et
al., "ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib," Encyclopaedia Islamica; Abbas, The Prophet's
Heir: The Life of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib; Qutbuddin, "ʿAli ibn Abi
Talib,"Dictio- nary of Literary Biography. 7 (أنا مدينة العلم وعليّ بابها
( ,) أنت يا عليّ أخي في الدنيا والآخرة .)Cited widely. Shiʿi sources
include: Nuʿmān, Sharḥal-akhbār, 1:89, 97. Sunni sources include:
Tirmidhī, Sunan, §3720, §3725, §3730, §3731; Ibn Saʿd, Ṭabaqāt, 3:22;
Ibn Mājah, Sunan, 145, §121. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 4 introduction famous
line, "Whoever takes me as his master, ʿAlī is his master."8 The Sunnis
also narrate this hadith, and they interpret the declaration as praise
for ʿAlī's high station, rather than a designation of succession.
Muḥammad died a few months later, in 11/632, and ʿAlī led the burial
prepa- rations. Though upholding his right to the succession, he ceded
command to the first three Sunni caliphs, Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, and ʿUthmān.
For the next twenty-five years, which saw the consolidation of the
Muslim polity in the Ara- bian Peninsula and its expansion into Syria,
Egypt, Iraq, and Iran, ʿAlī retreated from direct involvement in
governing. The history books recount that he spent those years
collecting and collating the texts of the Qurʾan and teaching Ḥasan and
Ḥusayn. In 35/656 in Medina, a group of irate Muslims assassinated
ʿUthmān, accus- ing him of nepotism; in the turbulent aftermath and
after repeated solicita- tions, ʿAlī accepted the caliphal pledge of
allegiance from the Muslim commu- nity in Medina and across most of the
Islamic empire. He ruled until 40/661, when he, too, was assassinated.
Most of ʿAlī's recorded sermons, letters, and sayings are woven into the
political and military fabric of those four difficult years. They
articulate morality and conviction and champion justice and char- ity.
As caliph, ʿAlī was forced to fight three groups of Muslims who rebelled
against his strict ideas of equity and equality: the first two were
armies brought against him by prominent individuals, who, in furtherance
of their political ambitions, falsely accused him of complicity in
ʿUthmān's murder; the third were rebels from his own army. ʿAlī fought
the first pitched battle of his caliphate just outside Basra, in Iraq,
in 36/656, four months after he was proclaimed caliph. His challengers
were the Prophet's widow ʿĀʾishah and the Quraysh Emigrants Ṭalḥah and
Zubayr. Famed as the Battle of the Camel, it was named for the animal
ʿĀʾishah rode
ontothebattlefield,servingasametaphorforitsrider.Theso-called"associates
8 (من كنت مولاه فعليّ مولاه .)Sunni sources include: Ibn Mājah, Sunan,
s.v. "Faḍāʾil aṣḥāb Rasūl Allāh"; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, s.v. "al-Khulafāʾ
al-rāshidūn"; Tirmidhī, Sunan, s.v. "Manāqib"; Bayhaqī, Iʿtiqād,
354--357; Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 210--218; ʿAbd al-Jabbār, Mughnī, 20.2:137;
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:291; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ al-abrār, 1:69--70;
Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 29--34, 62; Ghazālī, Sirr al-ʿālamayn 18, and in
several other works; Dhahabī, Siyar, 8:335, classifying it as a "widely
narrated" (mutawātir) hadith. Shiʿa sources include: Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh,
2:112; Nuʿmān, Sharḥal- akhbār, 1:99, 104, 106; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim
al-Islām, 1:15--19; Nuʿmān, al-Majālis wa-l-musāyarāt, 327--329; Ṣadūq,
Maʿānī, 65--74; Ṣadūq, Amālī, 2, §1, 108, §26, 317--318, §56, 514, §84;
ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad, Dāmigh al-bāṭil, 2:112--113; Thaqafī, Ghārāt,
2:658--659; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj, 1:55--67; Mufīd, Irshād, 1:174--177; idem,
Amālī, 44; Fattāl, Rawḍat al-wāʿiẓīn, 103, 350; Idrīs, ʿUyūn al- akhbār,
1:480--487. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 5 of the
Camel" were recruited mostly among the Basrans, while ʿAlī was sup-
ported by many from neighboring Kufa, a few groups from Basra, and
several distinguished Emigrants and Allies, close Companions of the
Prophet who had accompanied ʿAlī from Medina. The battle ended swiftly
in a clear victory for ʿAlī. Ṭalḥah and Zubayr were killed, ʿĀʾishah was
sent back to Medina, and their erstwhile supporters pledged allegiance
to ʿAlī. ʿAlī stayed on in Iraq, with Kufa becoming his de facto
capital, pressed to deal with the other grave challenger on the horizon,
the Umayyad governor of Damascus, Muʿāwiyah. Muʿāwiyah was ʿUthmān's
cousin, and son of one of Muḥammad's chief enemies, Abū Sufyān, many of
whose pagan family mem- bers ʿAlī had slain on the battlefield; he
refused to accept ʿAlī as caliph. ʿAlī sent his associate
Jarīr---earlier ʿUthmān's governor in Hamadhān---to Dam- ascus to
convince Muʿāwiyah to pledge allegiance. Muʿāwiyah responded with a call
to arms. In 37/657, the two clashed at the Battle of Ṣiffīn, on the
banks of the Euphrates at the border of Iraq and Syria. Muʿāwiyah was
supported by his Umayyad clan and many tribesmen from Syria. His main
advisor was ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, commander of the Muslim army that had
conquered Egypt three decades earlier, recalled by ʿUmar on charges of
corruption. ʿAlī's army con- sistedof severalCompanionsof
theProphetfromMedina,andmanytribesmen from Iraq. ʿAlī challenged
Muʿāwiyah to a duel, but Muʿāwiyah, aware of ʿAlī's reputation as an
intrepid warrior, refused. Battle commenced and continued for ten days.
ʿAlī himself---then around sixty years of age---took up the sword. Tens
of thousands were killed. Then, as the tide slowly turned in ʿAlī's
favor, Muʿāwiyah's army famously raised pages of the Qurʾan on spears as
an appeal for arbitration. ʿAlī initially rejected the suggestion as a
ruse. Ironically, many of his own Iraqi commanders insisted he accept,
and he gave in, stipulating that the arbitrators must rule according to
the Qurʾan. ʿAlī then attempted to appoint his cousin, the learned
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās as arbitrator, but he was overruled, and, again
ironically, his commanders insisted that he appoint the dismissed
governor of Kufa, Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī, who, in the lead-up to the Battle
of the Camel, had publicly directed them not to support ʿAlī. Muʿāwiyah
appointed ʿAmr.The twoarbitratorsmet afewmonths lateratDūmatal-Jandal,
in southern Syria. Their judgment---which, given their back-stories, was
to be expected---had cataclysmic consequences: Abū Mūsā ruled against
ʿAlī. ʿAmr ruled for Muʿāwiyah.The Syrians rejoiced.The Iraqis were
thrown into disarray. The rumblings of Iraqi dissatisfaction crescendoed
in the renegade move- ment of the so-called Kharijites, "Seceders."
Under the leadership of ʿAbdallāh ibn Wahb, four thousand men "seceded"
from Kufa and ʿAlī's following. With the rallying cry, "No rule but
God's!" they took up arms against him. ʿAlī fought them at the Battle of
Nahrawān in 38/658, on the banks of the Tigris River in al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 6 introduction Iraq. A
thousand Kharijites were persuaded to leave the battlefield before the
fighting began, a few took flight during the battle, four hundred
wounded were pardoned, and the rest, including their leader, were
killed. Having dealt with the immediate danger, ʿAlī attempted to resume
the fight against Muʿāwiyah. But the Iraqi tribesmen were tired, and
ʿAlī spent his final months urging them to mobilize. Meanwhile,
Muʿāwiyah was gaining ground. He took over Egypt, where his ally ʿAmr
ibn al-ʿĀṣtortured and killed ʿAlī's ward and governor, Muḥammad ibn Abī
Bakr. Muʿāwiyah also reportedly poisoned Mālik al-Ashtar, one of ʿAlī's
staunchest supporters, who had been enroute to Egypt to take over the
governorship from Muḥammad. From Damascus, Muʿāwiyah sent raid after
raid against the cities of Arabia and even to the heart of Iraq. ʿAlī
was praying in the Grand Mosque in Kufa at dawn on 19th Ramaḍān 40/661,
when the Kharijite agent Ibn Muljam (or Ibn Muljim) struck him a
deathblow. He lived for two more days, during which he counselled his
fol- lowers to piety and appointed his son Ḥasan as his successor. He
died on 21st Ramaḍān, at sixty-one years of age. ʿAlī is a familiar
figure in medieval Islamic histories. Chronicles refer to him frequently
in their accounts of the Prophet's mission, the reigns of Abū Bakr,
ʿUmar, and ʿUthmān, and his own caliphate. Biographical works usu- ally
include a long entry on ʿAlī, with chapters on his acceptance of Islam,
his excellent character, the praise for him expressed by the Prophet,
his juridical decisions, physical appearance, garments, seal and armor,
marriages and chil- dren, death, elegies composed in his memory, and his
sermons and sayings. Several monographs recount his battles, notably The
Battle of Ṣiffīn (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn) by the early author Naṣr ibn Muzāḥim
al-Minqarī (d. 202/818). Marty- rologies of ʿAlī are also many, second
in number only to those written about his sonḤusayn,themartyrof
Karbala;fourteenarelistedbytheShiʿibibliographer Āghā Buzurg al-Tihrānī
(d. 1970), including the lost martyrology of the early author Abū
Mikhnaf (d. 157/773). Numerous medieval works are devoted to cataloging
ʿAlī's merits, including works by well-known Sunni hadith scholars:
Nasāʾī (d. 303/915), Book of Virtues: The Excellence of ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib (Kitāb al-Khaṣāʾiṣfī faḍl ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib), Ibn al-Maghāzilī
(d. 483/1090), Qualities of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (Manāqib ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib), SibṭIbn al-Jawzī (d. 654/1256), Reminder for the Elite
(Tadhkirat al-khawāṣṣ), and numerous others. ʿAlī also figures
prominently in devotional poetry composed through the centuries by Shiʿi
as well as Sunni poets. Although events of ʿAlī's life are portrayed in
similar fashion by most histo- rians, he is perceived differently by
different denominations. For Sunnis, ʿAlī is a pious and austere man, a
close Companion of the Prophet, and the fourth al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
introduction 7 Rightly Guided caliph of Islam. His knowledge of Islamic
doctrine and law, his love for Islam and his closeness to the Prophet
Muḥammad, his heroic role in the early battles of the Muslims, and his
principled and pious rule are all applauded. Tafḍīlī Sunnis ("Upholders
of ʿAlī's Superiority"), who also revere the first three caliphs,
believe that ʿAlī was the most excellent individual after the Prophet.
For Sufi mystics, many of whom are Tafḍīlī Sunnis, ʿAlī is the first
link after the Prophet in the chain of mystic masters, and they
regularly quote his ethical and doctrinal statements in manuals of
spiritual guidance. For the Shiʿa, ʿAlī is the spiritual and temporal
successor of the Prophet, the infallible Imam, divinely guided and able
to perform miracles. His descendants are believed to inherit this role,
and allegiance to them is considered neces- sary for salvation. The
Shiʿa---short for Shīʿat ʿAlī, or "followers of ʿAlī"---have branched
out into several denominations, based on the line of succession they
accept as legitimate.The majority in the present time are theTwelver
Shiʿa---to whom our compiler, Raḍī, belonged---and they form the bulk of
the popula- tion in Iran, Iraq, and Lebanon. The Fatimid-Ismāʿīlī Shiʿa
ruled a large part of the Islamic empire from the 10th to the 12th
centuries ad with their seat in Cairo and are now located primarily in
South Asia, in the two main denom- inations, Ṭayyibīs and Nizārīs. The
Zaydī Shiʿa---earlier also a large presence in the region of the Caspian
Sea---are concentrated today in Yemen. Some smaller branches, such as
the Nuṣayrī denomination, proclaim ʿAlī's divin- ity. Such groups are
often termed Exaggerators (Ghulāt) in Islamic doctrinal works. Muslims
know ʿAlī by several titles that signify his preeminent stature. He is
hailed by Shiʿa and Sunnis as "God's lion" (Arabic: Asad Allāh,
Persian/Urdu: Shēr-ē Khudā), and "Ḥaydar" or "Ḥaydarah" a king among
lions, stemming from his proverbial prowess in battle. He is petitioned
as "Dispeller of hardships" (Persian/Urdu: Mushkil kushā). He is praised
as "Murtaḍā," the one with whom God is pleased. He is lauded as the
"Waṣī," the Prophet's legatee. And he is ref- erenced as the "Imām," an
authoritative religious leader. The Shiʿa also revere him as "Sāqi-ye
Kawthar" (Cupbearer of the Pool of Kawthar in Paradise), "Ṣid- dīq"
(Greatest Supporter of the Prophet), "Mawlā" (Master, a reference to the
aforementioned Ghadīr Khumm hadith, "Whoever takes me as his master,
ʿAlī is his master"), and "Amīr al-muʾminīn" (Commander of the
Faithful). This last is the most used of his titles in Shiʿa circles;
Sunnis apply the title to all Muslim caliphs, including ʿAlī. ʿAlī's
shrine in the city of Najaf, in southern Iraq, is visited annually by
hun- dreds of thousands of pilgrims. His caliphate is upheld as a model
for just rule, and his words and teachings are revered as repositories
of inspired wisdom. ʿAlī had declared to his associate Kumayl, "Those
who hoard wealth are dead even al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 8 introduction as they
live, whereas the learned remain as long as the world remains---their
persons may be lost, but their teachings live on in the hearts of men"
(§3.133). ʿAlī's legacy lives on in the hearts of men. 2 Collection of
ʿAlī's Words: Orality, Authenticity, Written Sources, and Influence on
Litterateurs ʿAlī lived in a world where the principal mode of
production, transmission, and collection of words was oral. In his time,
written Arabic texts were rare. Although ʿAlī himself served as one of
the Prophet's scribes in Medina and wrote down Qurʾanic passages as they
were revealed, written transcription by him and his few lettered
compatriots was carried out with rudimentary instru- ments and limited
to important documents. Most verbal materials from the early period were
initially related and preserved for a century or more chiefly by means
of oral transmission, until, after paper was introduced from China in
the early 2nd/8th century, writing burgeoned and they were
systematically transcribed in books. It is fair to ask the question: Are
ʿAlī's words as transcribed in the present vol- ume genuine?The short
answer is that substantial portions could be authentic, some in gist,
and some---especially those with striking images and rhythmic
lines---verbatim. ʿAlī was one of the most revered personages of early
Islam, his eloquence was proverbial, and during the four years of his
caliphate, he preached long and frequently to large, public audiences,
and so it is likely that many recorded materials attributed to him are
genuine. Moreover, given the consistent attribution to ʿAlī of certain
Qurʾan-based themes and nature- oriented images, and given their
compatibility with the historical and literary ambience of the time, it
is likely that they represent a true picture of his teach- ings. The
longer, technical back-story to that assessment---based on detailed
research grounded in empirical data and orality theory in my recent
book, Ara- bic Oration: Art and Function---is as follows:9 It is true
that the extended period of oral transmission for early Arabic verbal
materials meant that many inaccu- racies entered the written corpus. It
is also true that there were many drivers to false ascriptions, as well
as instances of rhetorical "improvements."10 Never- theless, there is
clear evidence for the existence of a genuine core of texts. As 9
Qutbuddin, "The Preservation of Orations: Mnemonics-Based Oral
Transmission, Supple- mentary Writing, and the Question of
Authenticity," in Arabic Oration, 21--63. 10 For example, the earliest
manuscripts M, Sh, N, and H render the last sentence of ora- al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 9
scholars of orality theory have established, formal verbal productions
of oral communities are rooted in "mnemonics"---i.e., memory aid
techniques, such as intense rhythm and graphic imagery. In addition to
producing beautiful lan- guage, these constitute a physiological aid to
memorization. Neuroscientists explain memory formation through the
propensity of the brain to organize
informationinpatterns.Theprocessiscalled"neuronalentrainment."Children
today learn the abcs, for example, through a melody. Imagine trying to
memo- rize a random list of letters without that jingle! Rhythm is
present even in writ- ing societies. In an oral society, it is a primary
characteristic. Like the Qurʾan, like orations and sayings by other
leaders from this period, ʿAlī's words were rhythmic and visual. These
rhetorical features---combined with the attested powerful memories of
oral societies---ensured that many orations and sayings were captured.
ʿAlī's family and close associates were the first narrators. Early
transmitters narrated materials partly in substance and partly verbatim.
This hybrid mode fell somewhere between the meaning-based transmission
of his- torical reports and the near-literal transmission of the Qurʾan
and poetry.11 Moreover, as Gregor Schoeler has convincingly
demonstrated,12 oral cir- culation in this society was increasingly
supplemented by scholarly notetak- tion §1.201 as (مكيلع نوكيف اً ّ لُك
اوفّلخت الو مكـل نكي اًضعب اومّدقف " ,)Send ahead a part that will remain
yours. Do not leave everything behind, for that will count against you."
Whereas Y and many later manuscripts have (اً ّ لَك مكيلع نوكيف اً ّ لُك
اوفّلخت الو اًضرق مكـل نكي اًضعب اومّدقف ,) which says basically the same
thing, but has more elaborate parallelism and prose-rhyme. That latter
reading is also added in the margins of M, Sh, and H. 11 Four
reservations expressed by modern authors---e.g. Aḥmad Amīn, Fajr
al-Islām, 1:148-- 149; and Ṣafāʾ Khulūṣī, The Authenticity of Nahj
al-Balagha, 31--35---apply to a handful of Nahj al-balāghah texts,
which, they say: contain (1) later philosophical terms such as "the
where"(al-ayn)and"eternal-ness"(al-azaliyyah);(2)detaileddescriptions,unusualforthe
period, of animals like the ant and the peacock; and (3) prophecies
about future events, such as the Zanj rebellion. Also, (4) some sermons
are long and would be difficult to mem- orize on the fly. The
possibility of later provenance for some of these texts, or at least of
modifications, remains high. As a caveat to the caveats, though, it is
also possible that technical terms were inserted into original texts,
and shorter pieces were later stitched together into lengthier scripts.
And it could be argued that the prophecies are cryptically worded and
plausible, and that copious descriptions of animals are also found in
pre- and early Islamic poetry. As in all compilations of early Islamic
materials, some parts are likely genuine, while others may be later
additions or modifications. As mentioned earlier, we must examine
individual pieces, rather than the compilation as a whole, to determine
probable authenticity. 12 Schoeler (Genesis of Literature, 71--72,
77--78) discusses the composition of Ibn Isḥāq's Maghāzī as a teaching
collection of notes. He also discusses an earlier work with the same
namebyʿUrwahibnZubayrasahypomnemanotebook,collectedbyhisstudentsandused
as a teaching aid (ibid., 17). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 10 introduction ing.
Over the century following ʿAlī's death of primarily oral transmission,
we see a steady increase of concurrent written transcription. Like the
Prophet's hadith, a fraction of ʿAlī's words was probably transcribed
during his lifetime or immediately afterward; we are told of a written
collection titled Khuṭab Amīr al-Muʾminīn ʿalā l-manābir fī l-jumaʿ
wa-l-aʿyād wa-ghayrihā (Orations of the Commander of the Faithful upon
the Pulpit on Fridays, Eids, and Other Occa- sions) by Zayd ibnWahb
al-Juhanī (d. 96/715), who fought in ʿAlī's army at Ṣiffīn and
Nahrawān.13 Through the following centuries, ʿAlī's words were recorded
in books by major historians, litterateurs, and compilers.14 From the
late 2nd/8th and early 3rd/9th centuries, Kufan scholars---including Abū
Mikhnaf Lūṭibn Yaḥyā
(d.157/773),IbrāhīmibnḤakamal-Fazārī(d.177/793),MasʿadahibnṢadaqahal-
ʿAbdī (d. 183/799), and Ibn al-Kalbī (d. 206/820)---produced dedicated
compi- lations of ʿAlī's words; this is as one would expect, given the
presence of ʿAlī and his most loyal followers in Kufa. Scholars from
Baghdad---including Wāqidī (d. 207/823), Minqarī (d. 212/827), and
Madāʾinī (d. 224/829)---also compiled ʿAlī's words. All these works have
been lost. The last three scholars, however, include many of ʿAlī's
texts in their extant histories, as do other 3rd/9th- and
4th/10th-century historians from far-flung parts of the Muslim empire
with disparate denominational affiliations: Ibn Hishām (d. 218/833,
after Ibn Isḥāq, d. 151/768), Ibn Saʿd (d. 230/845), Balādhurī
(d. 279/892), Abū Isḥāq al-Thaqafī of Isfahān (d. 283/896), Yaʿqūbī
(d. 284/897), Ṭabarī (d. 310/923), Ibn Aʿtham (d. 314/926), al-Qāḍī
al-Nuʿmān (d. 363/974), and many more. The above-- mentioned Juhanī, who
served in ʿAlī's army, is the chief source for Abū Mikh- naf's lost work
on ʿAlī's battles, which is cited in turn by Ṭabarī in his cele- brated
History. Literary anthologists, including Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/868), Ibn Qutay-
bah (d. 276/889), Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih of Spain (d. 328/940), Masʿūdī
(d. 345/956), and Ibn Shuʿbah of Ḥarrān (fl. 4th/10th c.), also include
large numbers of ʿAlī's orations, and many praise them profusely.
Jāḥiẓis said---though this attri- bution is uncertain---to have produced
a concise compilation of ʿAlī's max- ims titled Miʾat kalimah (Hundred
Proverbs), that I have edited and trans- lated.15 Jāḥiẓalso quoted ʿAlī
abundantly in his accepted works and praised him as the archetypal
paradigm of eloquence. Early Muʿtazilī thinkers such as Iskāfī
(d. 240/854) record ʿAlī's orations on the unity of God. Chancery-manual
13 Ṭūsī, Fihrist, 130, after Minqarī (d. 212/827), on the authority of
Abū Mikhnaf (d. 157/773). 14 See detailed list in ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ,
Maṣādir, 1:454--486. 15 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat kalimah, ed. and trans. Qutbuddin,
in Quḍāʿī, A Treasury of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and Teachings of
ʿAlī with the One Hundred Proverbs Attributed to al-Jāḥiẓ, 219-- 233.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 11
authors such as the Egyptian Naḥḥās (d. 338/950) present whole chapters
on ʿAlī's orations as part of the scribe's curriculum. Twelver Shiʿi
jurists such as Kulaynī (d. 329/941) and Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991)
include numerous cita- tions of ʿAlī's words in their works. The
Shāfiʿī-Ashʿarī scholar Māmaṭīrī (d. ca. 360/971) compiled a large
volume of ʿAlī's words and interactions. In the 4th/10th, 5th/11th, and
6th/12th centuries, major independent collec- tions of ʿAlī's words were
compiled and are still extant. The earliest surviving compilation is the
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd (The Book of God's Unity), compiled by the
aforementioned Fatimid-Ismāʿīlī Shiʿi scholar al-Qāḍī al-Nuʿmān
(d. 363/974), which contains two long sermons on God's oneness, titled
The Pearl (Dur- rah) and The Unique Sermon (Waḥīdah), with Nuʿmān's
commentary. Next is the present volume, compiled by Raḍī in 400/1010,
Nahj al-Balāghah (The Way of Eloquence). Then came Dustūr maʿālim
al-ḥikam (A Compendium of Signposts of Wisdom) by al-Qāḍī al-Quḍāʿī
(d. 454/1062), which I have edited and translated;16 Quḍāʿī's main
source appears to have been Māmaṭīrī's Nuzhat al-abṣār. Subsequent
compilations were dedicated to ʿAlī's aphorisms: Nathr al-laʾālī
(Scattered Pearls) by Ṭabrisī (d. 548/1153), and Ghurar al-ḥikam (Radi-
ant Maxims) by Āmidī (d. 550/1155). Kaydarī (d. after 576/1180), who
also wrote a commentary on Nahj al-Balāghah, collected ʿAlī's verse into
a Dīwān titled Anwār al-ʿuqūl (Lights for Intellects). Of less certain
provenance, an anony- mously compiled book of supplications titled
al-Ṣaḥīfah al-ʿAlawiyyah (ʿAlī's Parchments) is also attributed to ʿAlī,
as is a short compilation of Prophetic hadith titled Ṣaḥīfat ʿAlī ibn
Abī Ṭālib (Scrolls of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib). Addition- ally, Twelver
Shiʿis regularly recite a supplication ʿAlī is said to have taught his
devotee Kumayl, known by the latter's name as Duʿāʾ Kumayl (The Kumayl
Supplication). Finally, FatimidṬayyibīs believe that ʿAlī composed Kitāb
al-ʿIlm (The Book of Knowledge), which he bequeathed to his sons Ḥasan
and Ḥusayn, and which is now with the Imam in seclusion. In the emergent
Islamic civilization, ʿAlī's words influenced major littera- teurs and
scholars of Islam across denominational boundaries. Among early orators,
ʿAlī's words were favorite sources---memorized, alluded to, or quoted in
full. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd compares ʿAlī's influence on orators to the
influence of the preeminent pre-Islamic poet Imruʾ al-Qays on poets.17
The pro-Umayyad ascetic preacher of Basra al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī (d. 110/728)
was guided by ʿAlī's pious themes and language, as was the Syrian
preacher Ibn Nubātah al-Khaṭīb 16 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr maʿālim al-ḥikam,
ed. and trans. Qutbuddin, A Treasury of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and
Teachings of ʿAlī. 17 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 2:83.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 12 introduction
(d. 374/985), who had memorized a large number of ʿAlī's orations.18
Among scribes, ʿAlī's words were equally effective. I have mentioned
ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd's acknowledgment that he had "learned eloquence by
memorizing the orations of ʿAlī," and Naḥḥās's allocation of four
chapters of the Eloquence section in his chancery-manual to ʿAlī's
words.19 Tributes were also paid by early prose writers who recorded
ʿAlī's words and praised them, and I have mentioned some of these
litterateurs earlier. Masʿūdī, who recorded many of ʿAlī's texts,
notedthatscholarsinhistimehadmemorizedmorethan480of ʿAlī'sspeeches,
which they frequently quoted.20 ʿAlī's orations had special resonance
among those who held to the theological school of the Muʿtazilah, to
whom Raḍī and several of his compilation's commentators belonged, and
among whom Iskāfī was mentioned as having recorded ʿAlī's texts. These
rationalist scholars acknowledged their debt to ʿAlī on the fundamental
subject of God's unity.21 And ʿAlī's influence was not limited to prose.
Numerous wisdom-verses by the poet-prodigy Mutanabbī (d. 354/955)---who,
it should be noted, grew up, as did ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd al-Kātib, in ʿAlī's
capital, Kufa---are distilled from ʿAlī's words.22 3 Al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015): Career and Works Best known as compiler of Nahj
al-Balāghah, al-Sharīf Abū al-Ḥasan Muḥam- mad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī
al-Raḍī---in short, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, or simply Raḍī---was an eminent
Twelver Shiʿi Muʿtazilī thinker, a prominent political personage in the
Abbasid-Būyid realm, and one of the most notable scholars of his time.
He was born in 359/970 in Baghdad and was a lifelong resident of this
city. His family was descended from the Prophet Muḥammad and ʿAlī, his
grandfather being the great-grandson of Imam Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, and Raḍī
was thus closely connected with the Shiʿi imamate. His father had held
the post of Chief of the Prophet's Descendants (Naqīb al-ashrāf ) in
Baghdad; Raḍī was appointed aide to his father at the young age of
twenty, and after him as Naqīb for the entire Abbasid realm. His
extraordinary standing is illustrated by the 18 For al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī,
see Mourad, Early Islam between Myth and History, 85. For Ibn Nubātah,
see Ibn Taghrībirdī, al-Nujūm al-zāhirah, 4:150. 19 Naḥḥās, ʿUmdat
al-kātib, 304--310, 316--321. 20 Masʿūdī, Murūj al-dhahab, 3:172. 21 Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 1:17, cited later in the present
Introduction. See more references and discussion in Qutbuddin,
"Additional Categories: (2) Theology," in Arabic Oration, 372--377. 22
ʿAbdal-Zahrāʾ,
Miʾatshāhidwa-shāhidminmaʿānīkalāmal-ImāmʿAlīʿalayhil-salāmfīshiʿr Abī
al-Ṭayyib al-Mutanabbī. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 13 fact
that he was given this high appointment ahead of his elder brother, al-
Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, also a distinguished scholar, who would occupy the
post afterRaḍī'sdeath.Additionally,Raḍīwasputinchargeof
theannualPilgrimage to Mecca and appointed Chief Judge over the Court of
Petitions. Raḍī studied various disciplines with famous scholars. His
teachers included the grammarians Sīrāfī (d. 368/979), who died when
Raḍī was nine, Fārisī (d. 377/987), and Ibn Jinnī (d. 392/1001), the
aforementioned preacher Ibn Nubātah al-Fāriqī al-Khaṭīb (d. 374/984),
the historian Marzubānī (d. 384/994), the Twelver Shiʿi hadith scholar
Mufīd (d. 413/1022), and the Muʿtazilī theolo-
gianal-QāḍīʿAbdal-Jabbār(d.415/1024).HisstudentsincludedthepoetMihyār
al-Daylamī (d. 428/1037). Raḍī enjoyed the patronage of the Buyid sultan
Bahāʾ al-Dawla (r. 379-- 403/989--1012), who ruled in the name of the
Abbasid caliph al-Qādir (r. 381-- 422/991--1031).Towardtheendof
hislife,hehadashowdownwithQādirregard- ing the Prophetic lineage of the
rival Fatimid dynasty. Qādir was shown Raḍī's verses expressing his wish
to live in the Fatimid realm,23 and the caliph insisted he sign a
manifesto denouncing the Fatimid lineage. Raḍī refused, and Qādir
stripped him of his official positions. Most sources report the incident
thus from Raḍī's colleague, the litterateur Hilāl al-Ṣābī (d. 448/1056),
but a later report states that Raḍī submitted and signed; likely, his
name was inserted after his death to lend credence to the Abbasid claim
of legitimacy.24 It is also reportedthatRaḍībelievedhimself worthierof
thecaliphatethantheAbbasids and was poisoned by them. Raḍī died in
406/1015 at the relatively young age of forty-seven. Attesting to his
prominence and popularity, his funeral was attended by the grand vizier
Fakhral-Mulk,aswellasjudges,scholars,andotherstatedignitaries,andalarge
number of the people of Baghdad. Several elegies were composed in his
mem- ory. Raḍī was an outstanding poet and scholar with sixteen
substantial books to his name; high praise is recorded for his poetry
and his prose from contem- poraries as well as later scholars. His works
include studies of the literary and grammatical features of the Qurʾan
and hadith, works of history and biogra- phy,anthologiesof
poetry,andglossesonbooksof jurisprudenceandgrammar. Eight works are
extant, listed here in chronological order of composition: 1. Dīwān
(Collected Poetry), 684 poems in about 10,000 verses, containing
panegyric for ʿAlī and the family of the Prophet, as well as rulers and
23 Raḍī, Dīwān, 2:120. 24 Jiwa, "The Baghdad Manifesto," 42--43. Raḍī's
brother Murtaḍā is also reported to have signed the document. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 14 introduction
viziers, laments for Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī and for the poet's family and
friends, censure of the age, love, vaunt, and miscellaneous other
themes, com- posed over Raḍī's lifetime, starting from 369/980, when he
was ten years old. 2. Rasāʾil (Letters), literary epistles exchanged
with Hilāl al-Ṣābī, in about a thousand folios, of which only a small
portion composed between 380/990 and 384/994 is extant. 3.
Khaṣāʾiṣal-aʾimmah: KhaṣāʾiṣAmīr al-muʾminīn (Qualities of the Imams:
Qualitiesof theCommanderof theFaithful),acompendiumof ʿAlī'sbiog-
raphy,virtues,andpithysayingscomposedin383/994.Inhisintroduction, Raḍī
explains that he planned to record the virtues of the Twelve Imams to
refute an Abbasid detractor,25 but was able to complete only the sec-
tion on ʿAlī (82 pages in the 1986 Beirut edition). Nahj al-Balāghah is
an expansion of the "sayings" section of this earlier work. 4. Nahj
al-Balāghah (The Way of Eloquence), a compilation of orations, let-
ters, and sayings attributed to ʿAlī, composed in 400/1010 (the text of
the present volume---more on this work below). 5. Majāzāt al-Qurʾan or:
Majāz al-Qurʾan (Figurative language of the Qurʾan), also
titledTalkhīṣal-bayān fī majāzāt al-Qurʾān (Summary Expo- sition of the
Qurʾan's Figurative Concepts), composed in 401/1011, extant almost in
full, with chapters arranged in the order of the Surahs. 6. Maʿānī
al-Qurʾān (Themes of the Qurʾan), also titled Ḥaqāʾiq al-taʾwīl fī
mutashābih al-tanzīl (True Realities of Interpretation Regarding Ambigu-
ous Verses of Revelation), a large multi-volume tafsīr work composed in
402/1011, of which only volume 5 (itself 376 pages in the Cairo edition)
is extant, also with chapters arranged according to the order of the
Surahs. 7. Al-Majāzāt al-nabawiyyah (Figurative Language of Prophecy),
also titled Majāzāt al-āthār al-nabawiyyah (Figurative Language of
Prophetic Ha- dith), composed between 400/1010 and 406/1015, containing
literary and theological commentary on 360 hadiths. 8. Amthāl
(Proverbial Verses), a compilation of unknown date, partially preserved
in Ibn al-Ẓahīr al-Irbilī's (d. 677/1278) abridgment, Mukhtaṣar Amthāl
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī. The following eight works are lost:26 9.
Al-ZiyādātfīshiʿrAbīTammām(AdditionstothePoetryof AbūTammām). 10.
Al-Jayyid min shiʿr Ibn al-Ḥajjāj (The Best Poems of \[al-Ḥusayn ibn Aḥ-
mad\] Ibn al-Ḥajjāj). 25 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣal-aʾimmah, 36--38. 26 Najāshī,
Rijāl, 398; Ṣafadī, Wāfī, 2:277. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 15 11.
Al-Ziyādāt fī shiʿr Ibn al-Ḥajjāj (Additions to Ibn al-Ḥajjāj's Poems).
12. Mukhtār shiʿr Abī Isḥāq al-Ṣābī (Selections from Abū Isḥāq
\[Ibrāhīm\] al- Ṣābī's Poems). 13. Taʿlīq Khilāf al-fuqahāʾ (Annotation
of "Jurists' Disagreements"), perhaps an annotationof the
workbetterknownas Ikhtilāf al-fuqahāʾ (Jurists'Dif- ferences) by Ṭabarī.
14. Taʿlīq fī al-Īḍāḥli-Abī ʿAlī (Annotation of Abū ʿAlī \[al-Fārisī's\]
"Elucida- tion"), on Arabic grammar. 15. Sīrat wālidihi al-Ṭāhir
(Biography of \[Raḍī's\] Father, Ṭāhir). 16. Akhbār quḍāt Baghdād
(Reports about Baghdad's Judges). 4 Nahj al-Balāghah: The Wisdom and
Eloquence of ʿAlī The full Arabic title of the present volume is Nahj
al-balāghah min kalām Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib ṣalawāt Allāh
ʿalayhi, which translates literally as The Way (or: Well-Trodden Track,
or: Clear Course) of Eloquence: Selections from the Words of the
Commander of the Faithful ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, God's blessings on him. As
Raḍī tells us in his Introduction, his main criterion for the selection
of texts was eloquence, which is why he chose this title for his
compilation. Sure enough, it includes some of the most beautiful and
power- ful expressions in the Arabic language. Compiled in 400/1010, its
fame almost immediately took wing---within a few short decades, Nahj
al-Balāghah had become one of the most celebrated texts of the Arabic
Islamic heritage. 4.1 Form and Organization Nahj al-Balāghah is a
collection of texts---mostly excerpts, ranging roughly from a few lines
to a page or two in most standard editions---divided into three
genre-based sections: 232 orations (sing., khuṭbah), 78 letters (sing.,
risālah or kitāb), and 429 sayings (sing., ḥikmah), the latter
containing aphorisms as well as slightly longer sayings.27 Into these
three sections are integrated texts from 27
Numbersvaryslightlyindifferenteditions,dependingonhowaneditorseparatesoramal-
gamates certain pieces.In a few cases,thereis a difference of opinion as
to the genre of the texts---Raḍī, for example, lists §30, §1.212, §1.215
as orations, whereas some other schol- ars list them as epistles (for
details, see my notes for these texts). Raḍī also sometimes lists parts
of a single text in different chapters: for example, he places §1.147, a
text he identifies as ʿAlī's deathbed testament, under Orations, and
what he says is another part of the same text, §2.23, under Letters. In
what is probably a counterintuitive proposition for modern readers, a
text could in some cases fall into both categories, oral and written. It
could have been first delivered as an oration, then transcribed and
disseminated as an al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 16 introduction
subsidiary genres, such as testaments (sing., waṣiyyah or ʿahd),
supplications (sing., duʿāʾ), questions and answers, responses to
reports, and counsel to indi- viduals. A subsection in the Sayings
section contains nine lines with rare words (gharīb), followed by Raḍī's
explications. The compilation is prefaced with Raḍī's introduction
explaining the stimulus for his undertaking, his method of compiling,
and the broad compass and immense value of the contents. Within each
section, the compilation's sequence is based on the order in which Raḍī
happened to find his texts, rather than a methodical consideration of
chronology or theme.28 A handful of texts are followed by Raḍī's
comments on their virtuosity. Most texts are prefaced by a phrase that
goes something like "From an oration (or: letter, or: words) by him." A
few texts are preceded by a line or two of context, but the
circumstances are not systematically noted, in conformity with the
practice of most literary anthologists of Raḍī's time. 4.2 Sources Also
consistent with the practice of other literary anthologists---such as
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (d. 328/940) and Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1039), for
example---Raḍī does not systematically note the provenance of his texts.
However, in the past fifty years or so, scholars including al-Khaṭīb
ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ and Imtiyāz ʿArshī have meticulously listed extant early
books in which the compilation's texts appear, sometimes with full or
partial transmission chains (isnād); an updated list is provided as an
Appendix of Sources to the present volume. Some of the earlier books
could be Raḍī's actual sources,29 but more work is needed to determine
concrete lines of textual transmission. It is likely that Raḍī also
sourced from early books and documents that are now lost. For a handful
of texts in Nahj al-Balāghah, Raḍī does furnish the name of a
source.Fororations,henotesʿAlī'sassociatesNawf
al-Bikālī(§1.180)andDhiʿlib al-Yamānī (the latter through Aḥmad ibn
Qutaybah, through ʿAbdallāh ibn Mālik ibn Dajnah, §1.231). For letters,
Raḍī mentions Wāqidī's Kitāb al-Jamal (Book of the Camel, §2.75),
Iskāfī's Kitāb al-Maqāmāt (Book of Exhortations,
§2.54),SaʿīdibnYaḥyāal-Umawī's(d.249/863) Maghāzī (Expeditions,fromthe
epistle. It could also be that historians are unsure about the genre
because excerpts from orations and epistles from the early period are
stylistically quite similar. See discussion of this similarity in
Qutbuddin, Arabic Oration, 416--419. 28 Themes may be located using the
present volume's Detailed Contents and Indexes, and through
publishedconcordances,includingMuḥammad, al-Muʿjam al-mawḍūʿīli-Nahjal-
balāghah; Muḥammadī and Dashtī, al-Muʿjam al-mufahras li-alfāẓNahj
al-balāghah; and Bayḍūn,Taṣnīf
Nahjal-balāghah.Chronology---forthetextsIwasabletosituate---isnoted in
the footnotes to the present volume's translation. 29 See a brief list
of tentative sources in the introduction to the Appendix of Sources.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 17
author's father, d. 184/809, after Ibn Isḥāq, §2.78), and a copy in the
hand of Ibn
al-Kalbī(§2.74).Forsayings,hecitesʿAlī'sgreat-grandsonImamMuḥammadal-
Bāqir (d. 117/735, §3.79), Thaʿlab (d. 291/904, §3.405), Abū ʿUbayd's
(d. 224/838) Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Rare Words from the Hadith, §3.248), and
ʿAlī's associates, Nawf again (§3.95), and Kumayl ibn Ziyād al-Nakhaʿī
(§3.133, §3.242). As a result of the early oral transmission of these
materials, different sources offer assorted renderingsof the same
piece,and Raḍīsometimes includesmore
thanonerenderinginhiscompilation;awareof thephenomenon,hementions it in
his Introduction and flags texts that are repeated. Another consequence
of the initial oral transmission is that a handful of texts attributed
to ʿAlī in one source are attributed elsewhere to others, and Raḍī
identifies some of these ascriptions as well. 4.3 Contents: Contemporary
History and Islamic Teachings The contents of Nahj al-Balāghah straddle
two broad overlapping areas: con- temporary history and Islamic
teachings. Given the multipurpose function of oration, themes from each
of these two areas intermingle and recur. Historical material in the
volume is grounded in the final four-year period of ʿAlī's life, when he
ruled as caliph of the Muslim empire. The texts depict the ethos of
ʿAlī's time.They containsubtleties of
eventtrajectories,particularlyʿAlī'sacces- sion to the caliphate and his
battles. They offer nuanced portraits of historical personalities, above
all, of ʿAlī himself, but also of influential individuals from his
caliphate.30 They portray his sons, Ḥasan, Ḥusayn, and Muḥammad (ibn al-
Ḥanafiyyah), his brother ʿAqīl ibn Abī Ṭālib, his ward Muḥammad ibn Abī
Bakr, and his cousin ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās. They praise staunch
followers includ- ing Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī, ʿAmmār ibn Yāsir, Mālik
al-Ashtar, and al-Ḥārith al- Hamdānī, and refer to various governors,
commanders, judges, and tribal chief- tains, some of whom he chastised,
as he did al-Ashʿath ibn Qays. They describe adversaries, chiefly
Muʿāwiyah and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, but also Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, as well as
Muʿāwiyah's principal supporters and commanders. They present
contextualshadesinpoliticalanddoctrinalpositions,includingproto-Shiʿiand
proto-Sunni stances, as well as the evolution of the Kharijites. As
mentioned above, most of the compilation's texts are from ʿAlī's
caliphate, but several also
refertoeventsandindividualsearlierinhislife,andtheyincludecopiouspraise
forthe ProphetMuḥammadandtributetoMuḥammad'sfirstsupporters.Afew texts
date from ʿAlī's pre-caliphate years, and these include a eulogy to his
wife Fāṭimah, a letter to his close associate Salmān al-Fārisī, and
interactions with and about the Sunni caliphs ʿUmar and ʿUthmān. In
addition to actual data, 30 To locate names and themes within the
volume, see Detailed Contents and Indexes. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 18
introduction
thehistoricaltextsportraythepersonalstruggle,bringingintorelief thehuman
aspect of ʿAlī's history and his impression of the events and persons
therein. ʿAlī's teachings, the second large content area of Nahj
al-Balāghah, comprise facets of doctrine, philosophy, ethics, counsel,
and practical wisdom. Growing up under Muḥammad's care, ʿAlī was
continuously exposed to the Qurʾanic rev- elation. Permeated by its
vocabulary and themes, his words urge worship of the creator, promote
awareness of the transience of human life, and highlight the urgent need
to prepare for the imminent hereafter.31 Combining piety with virtue,
they exhort truth, gratitude, and patience, and extol the benefits of
liv- ing a modest and temperate life.32 Taking the middle ground between
secular humanism and insular faith, they advocate an inseparable blend
of individ- ual devotion and dynamic social engagement. Consistently,
they highlight the eminence of reason and learning. Numerous texts
feature a detailed parsing of God's transcendent oneness. Many describe
the marvels of God's creation, mostly the heavens, the earth, and the
human being, but also, in a couple of texts, the peacock, the bat, and
the ant. Several texts laud the stature of the Prophet's family. Some
contain down-to-earth instructions and acute observa- tions of human
behavior. Many portray the art of just leadership, predicating true
justice on compassion, wisdom, integrity, pluralism, and accountability
to God.33 They advocate strongly for the socially disadvantaged. They
preach kindness to animals. A few contain legal rulings, judgments
pronounced by ʿAlī for actual cases. Yet others are supplications: some
implore God's forgiveness and aid, one prays for rain, one at the start
of battle beseeches God's protection and victory, and one, a daily
morning prayer, contains thanks and entreaties.34 Three texts of counsel
are grounded in specific Qurʾanic verses.35 In sum, the teachings of
ʿAlī---a learned philosopher, a pious ascetic, a just leader, a gov-
erning caliph, a brave warrior, and an astute commander---bring together
dis- parate elements of the human experience. 31 Qutbuddin, "ʿAlī's
Contemplations on this World and the Hereafter in the Context of His
Life and Times"; Qutbuddin, "The Sermons of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib: At the
Confluence of the Core Islamic Teachings of the Qurʾan and the Oral,
Nature-Based Cultural Ethos of Sev- enth Century Arabia." 32
Qutbuddin,"PietyandVirtueinEarlyIslam:TwoSermonsbyImamAli";Qutbuddin,"Clas-
sical Islamic Oration's Art, Function, and Life-Altering Power of
Persuasion: The Ultimate Response by Hammam to Ali's Sermon on Piety,
and by Hurr to Husayn's Battle Oration in Karbala." 33 Qutbuddin, "Just
Leadership in Early Islam: The Teachings and Practice of Imam Ali";
Shah-Kazemi, Justice and Remembrance, 73--133. 34 Supplications: general
(§1.222, §1.224), for rain (§1.141), at the start of battle (§2.15),
daily morning prayer (§1.213). 35 §1.218, §1.219, §1.220. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 19
Somelonger,thematicallyfocusedtextshavespecialnames.Fivenamedora-
tionsareEtherealForms(Ashbāḥ),onthecreationof theuniverse;TheCrusher
(Qāṣiʿah), which castigates Lucifer and factionalism; The Radiant
(Gharrāʾ), which contemplates human mortality and counsels preparation
for the immi- nent hereafter; The Roar of the Camel Stallion
(Shiqshiqiyyah), on ʿAlī's right to the caliphate; and The Oration to
Hammām: Description of the Pious (Khuṭbat Hammām fī ṣifat al-muttaqīn),
which lists the myriad virtues of those who truly deserve the epithet
pious. In the Letters section, two long texts are the Testa- ment of
Counsel for Ḥasan (Waṣiyyat al-Ḥasan), in which ʿAlī cataloged ethical
and practical advice for his son, and the Letter of Appointment for
Mālik al- Ashtar (ʿAhd al-Ashtar), in which he laid out for Ashtar, whom
he was sending to govern Egypt, the moral backbone required for
righteous rule. In the Say- ings section, two are particularly lengthy
and distinct: The Four Pillars of Faith (Daʿāʾim al-īmān) are parsed as
patience, conviction, knowledge, and struggle against evil; Knowledge is
Better than Wealth (al-ʿIlmu khayrun mina l-māl) is a text of advice to
Kumayl al-Nakhaʿī.36 4.4 Style: Oral Aesthetics of Rhythm and Imagery
Rhythmically cadenced and stunningly visual, Nahj al-Balāghah reflects
ʿAlī's oral milieu.37 ʿAlī's orations and sayings, even his written
letters, breathe the aesthetic of orality, articulated in mnemonics and
metonymy. Mnemonics--- memory aid techniques---manifest in intensely
rhythmic prose with con- densed sentences and balanced parallelisms, and
graphic and often startling natural and lifeworld imagery, with extended
verbal metaphors and gripping dramatization. Language is grounded in the
features and movements of the camel and of other desert animals,
lifeworld objects, and cosmic phenom- ena. Abstract concepts are made
immediate and relevant through concrete physical images.
Metonymy---evocation by association---manifests in skillful allusion to
historical and literary context. Alongside emphatic grammar struc- tures
and rhetorical questions, these stylistic devices also served as
audience- engagement techniques that invited the audience to participate
in the speech act with internal response, and sometimes overt answers,
comments, and 36 Ashbāḥ, §1.88; Qāṣiʿah, §1.190; Gharrāʾ, §1.80;
Shiqshiqiyyah, §1.3; Khuṭbat Hammām, §1.191; Waṣiyyat al-Ḥasan, §2.31;
ʿAhd al-Ashtar, §2.53; Daʿāʾim al-īmān, §3.26; al-ʿIlmu khayrun mina
l-māl, §3.133. 37 For more detail, see Qutbuddin, "Style of the
Oration," in Arabic Oration, 91--164; Qutbud-
din,"ASermononPietybyImamʿAlīibnAbīṬālib:HowtheRhythmof
theClassicalArabic Oration Tacitly Persuaded"; Qutbuddin, "The Sermons
of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib: At the Con- fluence of the Core Islamic Teachings
of the Qurʾan and the Oral, Nature-Based Cultural Ethos of Seventh
Century Arabia." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 20 introduction
actions. The texts are further characterized by fine-grained, condensed
vocab- ulary and a high, dignified linguistic register. Eloquence is a
crucial component of preaching, and as scholars of litera-
turehaveargued,it"tacitlypersuades."38Abrilliantexpositionismoreeffective
than a clumsy harangue, and beautiful language more likely to evoke a
positive response than a plodding lecture. In combination with Qurʾanic
validation and rational argumentation, ʿAlī attempted to stir the hearts
and minds of his audi-
encewithverbalartistry.Moreover,thereisareligiousflavor,afocusonpiety,in
all modes of ʿAlī's speech, undergirding even the material produced in a
politi- cal or military context. At the same time, his words also have a
distinctly local flavor, a cultural texture grounded in desert
topography, tribal society, nomadic lifestyle, and the rich poetic
tradition of the Arabian Peninsula. 4.5 Commentaries and Response Works
Nahj al-Balāghah has generated an extraordinary number of
response-works, including commentaries, translations, supplements, and
abridgments by Shiʿi, Sunni, and Arab Christian scholars in medieval and
modern times, as well as glosses, concordances, works on sources, and
thematic essays by present-day scholars. In my rough estimate, the
number of serious extant works in this cat- egory ranges around 500,
many in multiple volumes. Dependingonthecataloger'srange,thenumberof
knowncommentarieson Nahj al-Balāghah lies somewhere between 81 and
210.39 After the Qurʾan, this is perhaps the largest number of
commentaries generated by any Arabic work---
comparedwithapproximately40onMutanabbī's Dīwān,70onBukhārī'sṢaḥīḥ, and
20 on Ḥarīrī's Maqāmāt, three of the best-known Arabic Islamic works.
Most Nahj al-Balāghah commentaries are in Arabic; some are in Persian
and other Islamic languages. Most comment on the full compilation; some
com- ment on a specific longer text, and a few of these latter
commentaries are in verse. Some of the best-known full commentaries on
Nahj al-Balāghah are the fol- lowing (all in Arabic, except the three
noted as Persian): -- Early Twelver Shiʿi commentators include ʿAlī ibn
Nāṣir al-Sarakhsī (fl. 6th/ 12th c.), Quṭb al-Dīn al-Rāwandī
(d. 573/1177), Quṭb al-Dīn al-Kaydarī (d. after 576/1180), and Ibn
Maytham al-Baḥrānī (d. 679/1280). -- Early Sunni commentators include
Ibn Funduq al-Bayhaqī (d. 565/1170) from Khurasan, who wrote one of the
earliest commentaries, and relied on 38 See Lanham, Analyzing Prose,
passim. 39 Amīnī, Al-Ghadīr, 4:257--272, lists 81; ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ,
Maṣādir Nahj al-balāghah, 1:202--254, lists 101; Lakhnawī, introduction
to Rāwandī's commentary, 1:36--49, lists 112; and ʿĀmilī, ShurūḥNahj
al-balāghah, lists 210. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 21 the
lost, and possibly the first, Nahj al-Balāghah commentary of Aḥmad ibn
Muḥammad al-Wabrī (fl. early 6th/12th c.), from Khwārazm. (Sarakhsī also
quotes Wabrī). Prominent Sunni authors whose commentaries are lost
include Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī (d. 606/1209) and Saʿd al-Dīn al-Taftāzānī
(d. 793/1390). -- Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd al-Muʿtazilī (d. ca. 656/1258) is the
best-known (early Sunni) commentator of all, whose celebrated commentary
in 20 volumes itself generated numerous response works. Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd---who also composed Seven Odes in Praise of ʿAlī---writes in
his introduction that "the noblest branch of learning is knowledge of
God ... ʿAlī's words kindled that fire ... the Muʿtazilah ... masters of
theology, from whom all others learned this skill, are ʿAlī's students
and emulators."40 He adds that ʿAlī is "leader of the eloquent and lord
of the articulate ... oratory and epistle-writing began with him."41 --
TheYemeni Zaydī Shiʿi Imam al-Muʾayyad bi-llāhYaḥyā ibn Ḥamzah (d. 749/
1348) wrote a commentary in six volumes. He traced his license to teach
the compilation back to Raḍī himself, by way of a sequence of licenses
granted by Zaydī scholars.42 Other Zaydī commentators are Fakhr al-Dīn
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Hādī (d. at the end of the 8th/14th c.) and Yaḥyā ibn
Ibrāhīm al-Jaḥḥāf (d. 1102/1690).43 -- Safavid-era Twelver Shiʿi Sufi
scholars who wrote commentaries include Ilāhī-Ardabīlī (fl. ca. 9th/15th
c., Persian), ʿAbd al-Bāqī Dānishmand (d. after 1039/1630), and Niẓām
al-Dīn al-Jīlānī (d. 1053/1643). -- Commentaries by modern
Egyptian-Sunni-Azharī scholars include the famed
introduction-cum-wordlist by the Grand Mufti of Egypt Shaykh Mu- ḥammad
ʿAbduh (d. 1905), which was later expanded by Shaykh Ḥusayn al-Marṣafī
(d. 1935) and then by Muḥammad Muḥyī al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd (d. 1972). In
the introduction, ʿAbduh speaks of his first encounter with Nahj
al-Balāghah, saying, "I felt I was witnessing a radiant intellect ...
which had detached itself from the divine procession and connected
itself to the human soul." He goes on to declare that memorizing and
studying the com- pilation "are essential to those who seek the precious
gems of Arabic and wish to rise in its ranks."44 40 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd,
SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 1:17. 41 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj al-balāghah,
1:24. 42 Muʾayyad Yaḥyā, al-Dībāj al-waḍī, 1:104--105. 43 Details of the
latter two may be found in Ansari and Schmidtke, "The Literary-Religious
Tradition among Seventh/Thirteenth-Century Yemeni Zaydīs (ii): Appendix
ii," 220. 44 ʿAbduh, SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 1:4. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 22
introduction -- Modern Iranian Twelver Shiʿi commentators include
Muḥammad Taqī Na- qavī, Muḥammad Taqī al-Tustarī, Nawwāb Lāhījānī
(d. ca. 1824), and the
GrandAyatollahMaḥmūdṬāliqānī,thelasttwowritinginPersian.Amodern Lebanese
Twelver Shiʿi commentator is Muḥammad Jawād Mughniyyah. The commentaries
discuss lexical, grammatical, and rhetorical matters, and sometimes
provide historical context and transmission history. The longer
commentaries include extensive historical, doctrinal, thematic, and
literary annotation, as well as further texts attributed to ʿAlī and
other historical fig- ures. As we should expect, each commentator
interprets ʿAlī's statements, both historical and doctrinal, according
to his own denominational approach. Numerousabridgmentsof selectionsfrom
Nahjal-Balāghahhavebeencom- piled: -- 3 medieval abridgments: Abū
al-Saʿādāt al-Isfahānī's (d. 634/1237) published work, Maṭlaʿ
al-ṣabāḥatayn (Two Suns Rising), transcribes the Sayings sec- tion from
Nahj al-Balāghah alongside the ethical hadith of the Prophet Muḥammad
compiled by Quḍāʿī (d. 454/1062) in Kitāb al-Shihāb (Light in
theHeavens,whichIhaveeditedandtranslated).45Twofurtherselectionvol- umes
are extant in manuscript form: al-Nafāʾis (Precious Words) by Niẓām
al-Dīn al-Muṭahhar (fl. 8th/14th c., Sunni), and al-Ṭarāʾif (Marvelous
Words) by an anonymous author.46 -- More than 34 modern selections
(called mukhtārāt or muntakhabāt).47 Nahj al-Balāghah has been
translated into more than 15 languages: --
AmedievalPersiantranslationbyFatḥallāhKāshānī(d.988/1580)titledTan- bīh
al-ghāfilīn (Waking the Heedless) is possibly the oldest translation. --
Numerous modern translations have been published in Persian, many in
Urdu and Turkish, and several in other Asian languages, including
Kazakh, Armenian, Chinese, and Thai, as well as a number of European
languages, including English, French, German, Spanish, Russian, Italian,
Romanian,
Polish,andCroat.Manytranslations,includingperhapsalltheEnglishtrans-
lations published to-date, have been rendered indirectly, via Persian.48
Also, many modern compilations style themselves as supplements (musta-
drakāt)to Nahjal-Balāghah,notablythe8-volumecompilationbyMuḥammad Bāqir
Maḥmūdī. 45 Quḍāʿī, Kitāb al-Shihāb, ed. and trans. Qutbuddin, Light in
the Heavens: Sayings of the Prophet Muhammad. 46 Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb,"
part 3, 49--50. 47 Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb," part 3, 50--62. 48
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb," part 3, 63--89; Esḥāqī, "Manbaʿ-shināsī-yi
tarjamah-hā-yi Nahj al- balāghah." Select list in present volume's
Bibliography, under Raḍī, Nahj al-balāghah. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
introduction 23 4.6 Dissemination: Manuscripts, Study, Admiration, and
Controversy In addition to the vast number of response works generated
in the medieval Middle East by Nahj al-Balāghah, its immediate and wide
circulation is evi- dent in the hundreds of manuscripts produced in
different parts of the Mus- lim world dating from as early as the
5th/11th century---many in Iraq and Iran, but also across the Islamic
lands, from India (in later medieval times) in the East, through
Khurasan in Central Asia, through Yemen in the Ara- bian Peninsula,
toward the West to Turkey, Syria, and Egypt.49 Of these, many
manuscripts were produced in markedly Sunni communities, particularly in
Khurasan---such as the manuscript of Yaʿqūb al-Naysābūrī (d. 474/1081),
from which our manuscript Y was transcribed---from an early time.50 And
in the 9th/15th--10th/16th-century (Ḥanafī Sunni) Ottoman caliphate,
compilations of ʿAlī's words were the centerpiece of the Topkapi Palace
library's oration col- lection, used, among other things, to teach
palace scribes.51 Another example of the esteem with which Sunni
scholars viewed the work is evidenced by the Ottoman scholar and head of
the chancery (Raʾīs al-kuttāb) Ahmad Efendi Taşköprüzāde (d. 968/1561),
who systematically cites ʿAlī's texts from Nahj al- Balāghah, alongside
Qurʾan and hadith, in his commentary on Ījī's Şerhu'l- Ahlaki'l-Adudiyye
(Book of Good Character);52 he does not mention the Nahj al-Balāghah by
name, though we know that he knew the text well---the Sulay- maniye
library in Istanbul holds several manuscripts in its "Raʾīs al-kuttāb"
col- lection, with ownership marks, including one with his name
inscribed on the flyleaf in his own hand (ms "S" in the present volume;
see also ms "K"). Nahj al- Balāghah entered China in the 19th and 20th
centuries, when Chinese Muslims went to the Middle East and brought back
religious texts, as well as Indonesia and Malaysia, where Muḥammad
ʿAbduh's ideas were influential during that period.53 Perhaps with some
minor exceptions,54 the two regions in the pre- 49 Ṭabāṭabāʾī lists 172
early manuscripts dating from the 5th/11th through the 12th/18th cen-
turies in worldwide collections. Muttaqī lists 458 manuscripts through
the early 14th/20th century. Details in Note on the Edition. 50 Ansari,
"Tāzah-hā-yi darbāra-yi riwāyat Nahj al-balāghah." For details of
ourYmanuscript, see Note on the Edition in the present volume. 51
Qutbuddin, "Books on Arabic Philology and Literature," in Treasures of
Knowledge, 607-- 623. 52 Taşköprüzāde, Şerhu'l-Ahlak, 37, 43, 49, 67,
69, 73, 75, 81, 83, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97. I thank Sarah Aziz for this
reference. 53 I thank SachikoMurata andWangXi (Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences, Beijing) for the information on China, and Karim Crow and Asna
Husin for the information on Malaysia and Indonesia. 54 John Morrow
notes two citations of ʿAlī's words---that do not, however, mention Nahj
al- balāghah specifically---in Aljamiado traditions among Spanish
Moriscos (Muslims who al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 24 introduction modern
Islamic world where Nahj al-Balāghah does not appear to have made
inroads are Umayyad Spain and Umayyad-influenced (post-Fatimid) North
Africa, which were both, for the most part, intensely anti-Shiʿi.55 The
dissemi- nation question---which awaits more thorough exploration---is
an important one and speaks to many aspects of religious, scholarly,
literary, and political life in the premodern and modern Islamic world.
Study of Nahj al-Balāghah and admiration for the compilation are pro-
nounced among all branches of the Shiʿa, as well as among Sunnis and
Arab Christians, in medieval and modern times. A few quotations by the
com- pilation's commentators have been cited earlier. The following
snapshot of other authors who expressed high regard for the collection,
with a few sound- bites from their laudations, further underscores the
esteem in which Nahj al- Balāghah was, and continues to be, held: --
TwelverShiʿireverencefor Nahjal-Balāghahiswelldocumentedthroughthe ages.
In recent times, Āghā Buzurg al-Tihrānī (d. 1970) writes: "After divine
revelation, no book has come into existence more bonded to God's word
than Nahj al-Balāghah."56 Among the Ṭayyibī Ismāʿīlī Shiʿa, the compila-
tion is an integral part of the religious curriculum. It is quoted
abundantly in sermons and works of history and doctrine, including the
works of the Yemeni Dāʿīs Sayyidnā Ḥātim Muḥyī al-Dīn (d. 596/1199) and
Sayyidnā Idrīs ʿImād al-Dīn (d. 872/1468), and the Indian Dāʿī Sayyidnā
Ṭāhir Sayf al-Dīn (d. 1965); these authors also pronounce benedictions
on Raḍī.57 The latter quotes from Nahj al-Balāghah in a full 65
instances in his annual Rasāʾil Ramaḍāniyyah (RamaḍānTreatises); in one
instance, he prefaces the quota- tion with explicit reference to the
compilation's title, saying: "Wisdom spoke onʿAlī'stongue,andthe*wayof
eloquence*(nahjal-balāghah)becameclear through his exposition. Belief
and conviction increase whenever a believer were forcibly converted to
Christianity) in the 16th century: §38 in Morrow's "Sources" volume on
divine decree, and §41 on knowledge (Morrow, Shiʿism in the Maghrib and
al- Andalus, 2:131--132 and 2:137) are the same as Nahj al-balāghah,
§3.273 and §3.349. I thank Linda Jones for this reference. 55 There seem
to be no manuscripts of Nahj al-balāghah from these two regions, no
mention
inscholarlycurriculaorbiographies,andnocitationsinbooks.Seethetext'sabsencefrom
Fierro's 8th--15th c. ad bio-bibliographical database, History of the
Authors and Transmit- ters of al-Andalus (hata-
https://www.eea.csic.es/red/hata/). Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih however, as
mentioned earlier, includes several orations attributed to ʿAlī in his
anthology, al-ʿIqd al- farīd, which is mainly influenced by the Islamic
East. 56 Tihrānī, Dharīʿah, 4:144. 57 Ḥātim, al-Majālis al-Ḥātimiyyah,
Majlis §110--130; Idrīs, ʿUyūn al-akhbār, 3:367; Ṭāhir Sayf al-Dīn, Ḍawʾ
nūr al-ḥaqq, 98, Masarrāt al-fatḥ, 192. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
introduction 25 hears his words."58 Among the Nizārī Ismāʿīlī Shiʿa,
quotations are found in earlyworksof
KhwājahQāsimTushtarī(diedafter533/1139)andNaṣīral-Dīn al-Ṭūsī
(d. 672/1274).59 Zaydī Shiʿi channels of transmissions to and within
Yemen from the 7th/13th century onward have also been described recently
in some detail.60 -- In the past two centuries, distinguished Sunni Arab
writers have continued to pay tribute.61The Iraqi Salafi al-Ālūsī
(d. 1924) called Nahj al-Balāghah "an ember from the fire of God's
speech, and a sun that radiates the Prophet's eloquence." The Egyptian
Zakī Mubārak (d. 1952) wrote that it "bequeaths manliness, nobility, and
loftiness of the soul, hailing from an indomitable spirit who faced
danger with a lion's resolve." His fellow Egyptian scholar ʿAbbās Maḥmūd
al-ʿAqqād (d. 1964) wrote a book on ʿAlī titled ʿAbqariyyat al-Imām (The
Genius of the Imām)---assuming everyone would recognize that the
quintessential Imam is ʿAlī---in which he declared that ʿAlī's words in
Nahj al-Balāghah encompass "divine wisdom." -- Nahj al-Balāghah is also
extolled broadly by Arab Christian scholars.62 They include the
Jordanian Rūkus ibn Zāʾid ʿUzayzī (b. 1903), the Syrian ʿAbd al-
MasīḥAnṭākī (d. 1923), and numerous Lebanese scholars, including Luwīs
Maʿlūf (d. 1946), Būlus Salāmah (d. 1979), Amīn Nakhlah (d. 1976), Fuʾād
Afrām al-Bustānī (d. 1994), and Ḥannā al-Fākhūrī (d. 2011). The Lebanese
scholar Nāṣīf al-Yāzijī (d. 1871) declared that anyone who wished to
excel in eloquence "should memorize the Qurʾan and Nahj al-Balāghah."63
Another Lebanese scholar, Jurj Jurdāq (d. 2014), memorized the
collection by the age of thirteen, and engaged with it deeply in a
five-volume work on ʿAlī that he titled al-Imām ʿAlī: Ṣawt al-ʿadālah
al-insāniyyah (Imam ʿAlī: The Voice of Human Justice). 58 Sayf al-Dīn,
Zubdat al-burhān, 31. Elsewhere, Sayf al-Dīn says: "Orations and sayings
of the Commander of the Faithful ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib are stairways to the
True Realities. Their way is the heart-healing 'Way of Eloquence,' and
their lines are lines of divine light" (Dalw ghadīr ḥaqq, 134). 59
Tushtarī, Maʿrifat,253/260;Naṣīral-Dīnal-Ṭūsī,
Rawḍah,41/44,74/86,79/93,128/160;idem, Maṭlūb, 20/36; idem, Āghāz,
55/64--65. 60 Ansari and Schmidtke, "The Literary-ReligiousTradition
among Seventh/Thirteenth-Cen- tury Yemeni Zaydīs (ii): Appendix ii,"
220--230. 61 Quotes and references in ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir, 1:87--99;
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb," part 4, passim. 62 Quotes and references in
Keizoghani and Nafchi, "The Greatness of Nahj Al-Balagha and the Words
of Imam Ali from the Perspective of Modern Christian Figures." 63 ʿAbd
al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir, 1:91. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 26 introduction --
Nahj al-Balāghah also continues to be admired in present-day India,
where it forms a regular part of the curriculum in Shiʿi as well as many
Sunni madrasas.64 I am not sure why, compared to other compilations of
ʿAlī's words, Nahj al- Balāghahhasbecomethetargetof acertainamountof
sectariancontroversy.65 It is true that the volume includes the
Shiqshiqiyyah oration (§1.3), in which ʿAlī claims his right to
Muḥammad's succession. But Jāḥiẓ, Ṭabarī, Ibn Hishām, and Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih, for example---four famous and respected early Sunni
scholars---cite sermons, conversations, and letters by ʿAlī that contain
similar themes.66 And large parts of the Shiqshiqiyyah itself are
recorded much before Raḍī by the early Sunni-Muʿtazilite author Abū
al-Qāsim al-Balkhī (d. 319/931), and the Sunni-Shāfiʿī-Ashʿarī scholar
ʿAlī ibn Mahdī al-Ṭabarī al-Māmaṭīrī (d. ca. 360/971).67 The Testament
of Ashtar (§2.53 in the present volume), too, another unfairly maligned
text (by, for example, Wadād al-Qāḍī, "An early
Fāṭimidpoliticaldocument"),isrecordednotonlyintheTwelverShiʿiIraqinar-
rativetraditionbyIbnShuʿbahal-Ḥarrānī(fl.4th/10thc.)andRaḍī(d.406/1015),
but also in a distinct Fatimid Ismāʿīlī Shiʿi Egyptian narrative
tradition by al-Qāḍī al-Nuʿmān (d. 363/974), and in a yet further and
distinct Zaydi Shiʿi Yemeni narrative tradition in an unpublished
manuscript in the Ambrosiana library in Milan.68 It appears that it was
almost three centuries after Raḍī, when the Damascene historian Ibn
Khallikān (d. 681/1282) first raised doubts about the compilation's
authenticity, that it began to be viewed in some quar- ters as a
"Shiʿi"---code for "seditious"---text. Several pro-Umayyad Damascus
authors---including, notably, IbnTaymiyyah (d. 728/1328)---followed Ibn
Khal- likān's lead.69 This limited group of detractors notwithstanding,
Nahj al-Balā- 64 Kaur, Madrasa Education in India, 387. 65 See detailed
analysis in Qutbuddin, "Is Nahj al-balāghah a Shiʿi Book? Insidious
Labels and Academia's Myth of Objectivity." 66 E.g., Ibn Hishām, Sīrah,
2:489--490; Jahiz, Bayān, 2:50--52; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:231--233, 5:7--8;
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:63, 68; more in Madelung, Succession to
Muhammad, 28--33, 141, and passim. 67 Quotationof
ShiqshiqiyyahorationinBalkhī'snowlostbookscitedbyIbnAbīal-Ḥadīd(Ḥ
1:205/206); Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhat al-Abṣār, 255 (several biographers say
Māmaṭīrī was a Sunni Shāfiʿī Ashʿarī, a few say he was a Shiʿi Zaydi;
details in editor's introduction, ibid., 15--23). 68 Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim,
1:353--367; see details of Zaydi Ambrosiana manuscript (catalog no. H
129, fol. 167v ff.) in Anṣārī, "Majmūʿah-ye dīgar az nuskhah-hā-ye
khaṭṭī Ambrosiana." See also Anṣārī, "Riwāyat wa-nuskha-ī jadīd az
ʿahdnāmah-ye Mālik-e Ashtar." 69 Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328), Minhāj
al-sunnah, 8:55--56; Dhahabī (d. 748/1347), Mīzān al-iʿtidāl, 3:124; Ibn
Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1448), Lisān al-mīzān, 5:529. The following
are their three main critiques: (1) Nahj al-balāghah's materials are not
found in earlier sources---which is simply incorrect; see, for example,
Appendix of Sources in the present al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 introduction 27 ghah
continues to be memorized, studied, and cited avidly across wide reaches
of the Islamic world. This brilliant ecumenical text rightly belongs to
the collective heritage of Islam, the communal legacy of Arabic, and the
shared inheritance of humanity. 5 Concluding Remarks Of the numerous
compilations of ʿAlī's words, Nahj al-Balāghah towers above the rest in
its fame. With a winning combination of brilliant prose and deep wisdom,
it has enjoyed unprecedented currency through the centuries, being
widely read and highly acclaimed throughout the Islamic world. On the
one hand, the collection has become a benchmark for high style, the
exemplar par excellence for those who would follow the Arabic "way of
eloquence." On the other hand, ʿAlī's wise teachings have resonated with
Muslims throughout the past fourteen centuries, and they continue to
hold immense consequence today. As a system of values, they promote a
just and compassionate vision of Islam. In strife-torn Muslim-majority
lands, they could unify Shiʿis and Sunnis in their common faith. The
divide between Shiʿism and Sunnism, to put the issue in simplistic
terms, is largely based on the perception of ʿAlī's role as first Imam
versus fourth Caliph. His own words and his example can and should be
used not to create divisions between groups but to bring people
together, to heal. As universal teachings of ethics, moreover, ʿAlī's
words transcend time, place, and affiliation. They embody the best
values we all possess. They teach harmonious relations with all
humans---for, as ʿAlī reminds us, people are "are either our brothers in
faith or our peers in creation." volume, and the list of earlier sources
in which Nahj al-balāghah texts are found in ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir
Nahj al-balāghah, passim; ʿArshī, Istinād Nahj al-balāghah, passim;
Dashtī, Ravish-i taḥqīq, passim. (2) Raḍī does not cite his
sources---mostly correct, but, as mentioned earlier, he followed the
norm for literary compilations of his time, and mod- ern scholars have
filled the breach. (3) The book contains insults (sabb) directed at the
first three Sunni caliphs---a more complicated issue, but in essence,
the charge is false. Only a handful of texts reference Abū Bakr and
ʿUmar at all, and they say nothing directly critical. Even regarding
ʿUthmān, whose administration many Muslims censured, Nahj al- balāghah
texts contain no overt reproach. Abundant castigations, however, are
directed at Muʿāwiyah and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, and, to a lesser extent,
Ṭalḥah and Zubayr---individuals who brought armies to fight ʿAlī.
ʿĀʾishah, another lead player in the Battle of the Camel, is not
referenced directly, presumably for reasons of decorum. See further
details of cri- tiquesandresponsesinSultan, ÉtudesurNahjal-Balâgha,
passim;Hassan, ACriticalStudy of Nahj al-balāgha, 25--58; Djebli, Encore
à propos de l'authenticité du Nahj al-Balagha, passim; ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ,
Maṣādir, 1:100--199; Jalālī, Dirāsah ḥawl Nahj al-balāghah, 52--75;
summarized in Qutbuddin, "Nahj al-balāgha,"ei3; and Qutbuddin, "Is Nahj
al-balāghah a Shiʿi Book?" al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera Qutbuddin,
2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_003 This is an open access chapter
distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. Note on the
Edition and Translation: Manuscripts and Methodology The manuscripts and
methodology used to prepare the present volume are
describedinthefollowingpages.Myhopeistohaveproducedahighlyaccurate
critical edition and translation of Nahj al-Balāghah, based on the
earliest and most important extant manuscripts, and on a carefully
constructed stemma. 1 Manuscripts As can be expected for a text of such
fame, several hundred manuscripts are extant in collections in the
Middle East and worldwide,1 some dating from the 5th/11th century just
decades after Raḍī finished his compilation in 400/1010. To prepare my
edition, I have consulted fourteen of the earliest manuscripts, dating
from the 5th/11th through the 7th/13th centuries,2 some examined for the
first time in modern scholarship. These manuscripts are valuable not
only because of their early provenance, but also because of their
eminent genealo- gies: eight are copied or corrected by renowned
scholars, and three even trace their lineage to Raḍī's own autograph
manuscript. 1.1 Summary List of Manuscripts The following is a summary
list of the manuscripts---five primary and nine secondary---consulted
for the present edition: 1 In a series of articles from 1986/1987 to
1992, ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz Ṭabāṭabāʾī listed and described 172 manuscripts from
the 5th/11th through the 12th/18th centuries: Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī
min makhṭūṭāt Nahj al-balāghah," 62--102, mss §1--86; Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Mā
tabaqqā min makhṭū- ṭāt Nahj al-balāghah," 13--36, mss §87--147;
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb Nahj al-Balāghah: Makhṭū- ṭāṭuhu," 3:7--20, mss
§148--172. In a 2016 online article, Ḥusayn Muttaqī listed 458 manu-
scripts from the 5th/11th through the early 14th/ late 19th centuries:
Iṭlālah ʿalā makhṭūṭāt Nahj al-balāghah fī al-maktabāt al-ʿālamiyyah,
http://manuscripts.ir/fa/90/بانک-اطلاعات-
news/إطلالة-على-مخطوطات-نهج-البلاغة-في-المكتبات-العالمية-3835/مقالات
;also listed and further manuscripts added in his 2019 publication,
Muʿjam al-Āthār al-makhṭūṭah fī al-Imām ʿAlī, pp. 374--386. 2 I
collected copies of eleven additional early manuscripts dating from the
7th--9th/13th--15th centuries, located in Iranian and Turkish libraries;
I eventually decided not to consult them for the present edition,
realizing that they would clutter the apparatus without adding any-
thing new. All the manuscripts are relevant, however, to the text's
reception history, which awaits detailed study. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on
the edition and translation 29 table 1 Primary manuscripts Sigla Date
Library Location Catalog number Special Merit Mم469/1077 Marʿashī Qum,
Iran 3827 Checked against manuscript read out to Raḍī Shش5th/11th c.
Shahrastānī Baghdad, Iraq -- Perhaps earliest manuscript, 406/1015 or
1016 Nن494/1101 Naṣīrī Tehran, Iran -- Early manuscript Hھ553/1158
Rampur Raza Rampur, India 1190 Copied from Faḍlallāh al- Rāwandī's
511/1158 ms, which was checked against Raḍī's autograph copy Yي608/1212
Tehran University Tehran, Iran 1782 Copied from Yaʿqūbī's 474/1081 ms,
which was checked against Raḍī's autograph copy table 2 Secondary
manuscripts Sigla Date Library Location Catalog number Lل510/1116 Mumtaz
ul Ulama Lucknow, India --- Zز538/1144 Maulana Azad, amu Aligarh, India
485 Dد544/1149 Imam Reza Mashhad, Iran 13847 Qق565/1170 Iraqi National
Museum Baghdad, Iraq 356 Sس567/1171 Sulaymaniye Istanbul, Turkey
reisulkut- tab 942 Chچ588/1192 Chester Beatty Dublin, Ireland 5451
Aآ598/1202 Sulaymaniye Istanbul, Turkey ayasofya 4344 Tت615/1218 Topkapi
Palace Istanbul, Turkey Aḥmad iii 2556 Kك684/1285 Sulaymaniye Istanbul,
Turkey reisulkut- tab 943 1.2 The Manuscripts' Contents The manuscript
evidence shows that Raḍī's original Nahj al-Balāghah consists of three
main sections of ʿAlī's words: 232 orations, 78 letters, and 429
sayings, including 9 sayings in a subsection on rare words; some texts
are followed by al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 30 note on the edition
and translation Raḍī's brief commentary. The anthology is bookended by
Raḍī's introduction and brief conclusion. Two ancillary aspects of the
manuscripts' contents are as follows: Sequence of Orations: A set of
eight orations---§1.183--190---are arranged in two different sequences:
Sequence 1 is the one followed in the present edition. It is found in
primary manuscripts M and Sh, and secondary manuscripts Z, S, Ch, A, T,
and K. Sequence 2 is as follows: Oration §1.182 is followed by
§1.191--232. Orations §1.183--190 come after §1.232, the final oration
in Sequence 1; §190 (Qāṣiʿah) is the final oration in Sequence 2.
Sequence 2 is found in primary manuscripts N, Y, and H, and secondary
manuscripts L, D, and Q. Addenda: A number of manuscripts contain the
following post-Raḍī addenda
(detailsarenotedintheindividualmanuscriptdescriptionsthatfollowthissec-
tion):
Additionaltexts:SeveralmanuscriptscontainextratextsattributedtoʿAlī---
six orations (§1.233--238), one letter (§2.79), and seventeen sayings
(§3.430-- 446)---that are inserted at the end of each of the three
sections. The insertions are early, perhaps from Raḍī's lifetime and
perhaps with his approval, but they werenotpartof
hisoriginalcompilation.3OtherthanKandCh,allmanuscripts signal the
inserted sayings as additions (ziyādah), and earlier scholarship has
noted their insertion.Y, H, and L also signal the added orations, and H
and L the added letter---in modern scholarship, the present edition is
the first to identify their insertion. Supplements: Some manuscripts
contain up to four supplements inserted right after Raḍī's conclusion
(and others contain further ad hoc supplements): -- Threesetsof
versesinpraiseof Nahjal-Balāghahby:(1)AbūYūsuf Yaʿqūbibn Aḥmad
al-Naysābūrī (d. 474/1081, who also penned an important lost manu-
script of Nahj al-Balāghah consulted by some of our manuscripts); (2)
his son Abū Bakr al-Ḥasan ibn Yaʿqūb (d. 517/1123); and (3) the
grammarian ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Fanjkurdī (d. 513/1119). -- Inscriptions of
ʿAlī's signet-rings (nuqūsh khawātimihi). Marginalia: All manuscripts
contain a larger or smaller number of study notices, marginalia, and
stamps of ownership. 3 According to Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ20:180) and
Baḥrānī (B 1029), whose comments are cited at the end of the present
edition's notes. As Raḍī mentions in his conclusion, he left spaces at
the end of each of his three sections for himself or others to write in
additional texts, and scholars appear to have done so. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 31 I have transcribed the additional texts in the
edition and translation notes, but not the supplements or marginalia.
1.3 Primary Manuscripts For the present edition, I have relied primarily
on five precious manuscripts, all probably originating in Iraq and Iran.
The first three---M, Sh, and N---are each claimed by specialists, as
detailed below, to be the oldest known manu- script of the work. They
were transcribed in the 5th/11th century by scholars either
contemporaneous to the compiler, Raḍī (d. 406/1015), or a generation or
two after him; Sh may even be from as early as 406/1015 or 1016. M is
espe- cially valuable because it is said to have been checked against a
manuscript
correctedbyRaḍī,buttheothertwomanuscriptsalsogobacktoRaḍī'soriginal: of
theothersmakingupthefiveprimarymanuscriptsources,Hwastranscribed from
the early 6th/12th manuscript of the scholar Faḍlallāh al-Rāwandī, and Y
from the manuscript of the aforementioned 5th/11th-century scholar-poet
Yaʿqūb al-Naysābūrī, both parent manuscripts said to have been copied
from Raḍī's manuscript. In terms of preservation, manuscript Y is
complete, while M, Sh, N, and H are nearly complete, missing only the
first few folios and a few inner ones. The following are details of my
primary manuscripts, in approximate chronological order: \[\]مor \[M\]:
Marʿashī Manuscript: Iranian manuscript dated 469/1077,4 located
inthelibraryof Ayatollahal-Marʿashī,Qum,catalogno.3827,intwoparts,5pub-
lished in a single-volume facsimile edition titled Nahj al-balāghah:
Muṣawwa- rahminnuskhahmakhṭūṭahnādirahminal-qarnal-khāmis,editedbyMaḥmūd
al-Marʿashī(Qum:MaktabatAyatollahal-Najafīal-Marʿashī,1406/1986);thefull
manuscript is available online.6 Mīrzā ʿAbdallāh Afandī, an
11th/17th-century historian who once owned the manuscript, writes that
it was "checked against a manuscript read out \[in a study session\] to
the compiler, Raḍī."7 The eminent 4 The final folio 171v (p. 335 of
facsim. ed.) contains a mostly undotted date: (سنة ىـع وـتں وارىـماىـہ
)that can be read as "sanata tisʿin \[or: sabʿin\] wa-sittīna
wa-arbaʿi-miʾah (in the year nine \[or: seven\] and sixty and four
hundred)." Afandī (Riyāḍal-ʿulamāʾ, 49) confirms the 469ah dating. 5
Part 1---fols. 1r--91v (pp. 1--174 of facsim. ed.)---includes Raḍī's
introduction and orations §1.1 to §1.186. Part 2---fols. 92v--171v
(pp. 176--335 of facsim. ed.)---begins with oration §1.187 and goes to
the end of the compilation. 6
http://arabic.balaghah.net/sites/default/files/book/l164/1.pdf. 7
Afandī, Riyāḍal-ʿulamāʾ, 2:87, in his biography of the copyist, Ibn
al-Muʾaddib. Afandī adds that Ibn al-Muʾaddib received a license to
transmit the text from his teacher, Jaʿfar ibn al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 32 note
on the edition and translation Nahj al-Balāghah scholar ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz
Ṭabāṭabāʾī calls it "one of the oldest and most valuable manuscripts" of
Nahj al-Balāghah, "perhaps even the most valu- able of them all."8 --
The copyist is the well-known scholar Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Ḥasan ibn
al-Ḥusayn al-Muʾaddib al-Qummī (d. early 6th/12th c.). Place is not
mentioned. -- The manuscript is almost complete in 171 folios, numbered
in the facsimile edition in 335 pages.9 The opening folios (Raḍī's
introduction, orations §1.1-- 18), and folio 24r (orations §1.55--59)
are missing, and the facsimile edition inserts folios from later
manuscripts to complete the text---in the present edition, I do not
consult the inserted folios. The Sayings section is also miss-
ingasubstantialportion(§3.132--355,§3.429).Afewsayingsareinadifferent
sequence than in some other manuscripts. -- The manuscript is written in
clear Naskh script, though cramped in some places and difficult to read,
fully dotted and vocalized. Numerous study notices, corrections, variant
readings, and lexical explanations are provided in different hands in
the margins. -- The added orations are transcribed without signaling the
insertion. The added letter is transcribed by a later hand in the margin
without flagging the insertion. The added sayings are not included. --
Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 1. -- Blessings for the Prophet
Muḥammad are invoked throughout with the for- mula, "God's blessings and
peace on him and his descendants" (ṣalla llāhu ʿalayhi wa-ālihi).
Blessings for ʿAlī are invoked with the formula "peace on him" (ʿalayhi
al-salām). -- Raḍī's explanatory remarks are not prefaced by the
copyist's added phrase found in several other manuscripts, viz., "The
Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\] said." \[\]شor \[Sh\]: Shahrastānī Manuscript: Early
5th/11th-century manuscript, pos-
siblydated406/1015or1016,10locatedintheprivatelibraryof
AyatollahHibatal- Muḥammad ibn al-ʿAbbās al-Dūrīstī, and that the
well-known early commentator of the text Quṭb al-Dīn al-Rāwandī
(d. 573/1177) transmitted in turn from him (ibid., 2:79); see more on
Ibn al-Muʾaddib in ibid., 2:43, 49. 8 Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "al-Mutabaqqī," 5:62,
ms §1. 9 There are two cases of misnumbering in the facsim. ed.: (1)
Fol. 42rv (pp. 75--76) and fol. 43r (p. 77) are incorrectly numbered and
switched around; the editor is mistaken in noting that three folios
afterfol. 43 aremissing.(2)The numbering jumps from fol. 109 to
fol. 111--- there is no fol. 110---but no text is missing. 10 The date
is transcribed on the penultimate folio as "the month of Rajab, in the
\[Hijri\] year four hundred and \[undotted number\]." An entry on a
prefatory folio clarifies the undotted number as six, saying, "This
manuscript was written in Rajab, 406ah \[1015 or 1016ad\]." al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 33 lāh al-Shahrastānī in al-Kāẓimiyyah, Baghdad, Iraq;11
beautiful facsimile print- ing by Alulbayt Foundation (London:
Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 2013). Majallat al-Murshid
al-Baghdādiyyah (vol. 2, no. 2, 1927, p. 75) deems it the oldest known
manuscript; and a notation on the final folio states that the esteemed
IraqischolarHibat al-Dīnal-Ḥusaynīal-Shahrastānī(d.1967)hascer- tified
it as the oldest extant manuscript. -- Place is not mentioned, and the
copyist's name is unreadable. -- The manuscript is almost complete in
175 folios. The first three folios of Raḍī's introduction are missing,12
and there is some water damage through- out, especially on the last
folios. The manuscript is written in clear Naskh script with Kufic
undertones, the latter also suggesting early provenance. It is fully
dotted and vocalized, with headings in red. The same red is used for
some corrections in the margins and the text. Other corrections, variant
readings, and lexical explanations are provided in several different
hands, in black, in the margins. -- Oration texts are arranged in
Sequence 1. --
Theoriginalmanuscriptcontainsthefullerblessingsformulathroughoutfor the
Prophet Muḥammad as "God's blessings on him and his descendants" (ṣallā
llāhu ʿalayhi wa-ālihi). The phrase "and his descendants" (wa-ālihi),
has been brushed out in most (though not all) places and overwritten
with "and grant him peace" (wa-sallam), possibly signaling a
"correction" by an overzealous Sunni reader. Blessings for ʿAlī are
invoked with the formula "peace on him" (ʿalayhi al-salām). -- The added
orations are transcribed in the margin in a different hand. The added
letter is transcribed in the original without flagging. The added say-
ings are transcribed in the original and flagged in red with the line,
"Extra texts added from a manuscript written in the lifetime of the
compiler" (ziyādah min nuskhah kutibat fī ʿahd al-muṣannif ). -- The
final folios transcribe Yaʿqūb's and Ḥasan's verses in praise of Nahj
al- Balāghah, which would appear to be a later addition. -- Raḍī's
explanatory remarks are prefaced with the line, "The Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\]
said." To complicate matters, though, the final folio contains verses of
praise for the work by Yaʿqūb, who died in 474ah, and his son Ḥasan, who
died in 517ah, with blessings for the deceased invoked for both---if the
manuscript date of 406ah is correct, as it appears to be, the verses
must be a later addition. 11 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Fī Riḥāb," 29:8 ms
§148. 12 Also, folios containing oration §1.80.6 (from: satarahā ʿankum)
to §1.88.7 (to: aw sāʿin ḥāfid) are misplaced in the facsimile edition,
where they are transcribed within §1.104. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 34 note
on the edition and translation
\[\]نor\[N\]:NaṣīrīManuscript:Manuscriptdated494/1101,locatedinthelibrary
of Muṣṭafā Ṣadr al-Afāḍil Dānish Naṣīrī al-Amīnī al-Shīrāzī, Tehran;13
facsim- ile printing by Madrasat Chihil Sutūn in the Grand Mosque of
Tehran, titled Nahjul Balagha of Hazrat Ali, edited by Ḥasan Saʿīd
(Tehran: Maṭbaʿat Gulshan, 1981; Library of Congress mlcmn 2001/01154).
The copyist had likely consulted Yaʿqūb's manuscript.14 -- The copyist
is Faḍlallāh ibn Ṭāhir ibn al-Muṭahhar al-Ḥusaynī. The date is
transcribed as 494/1101.15 Place is not mentioned. -- The manuscript is
almost complete in 162 folios, numbered in the facsim- ile edition in
324 pages, with the first 15 or so folios missing: the manuscript
beginsat§1.32.16ThemanuscriptiswritteninclearNaskhscript,fullydotted and
vocalized. Numerous corrections, variant readings, and lexical expla-
nations are provided in different hands in the margins. The orthography
is archaic---e.g.,عثمنwith no alif after mīm. -- Oration texts are
arranged in Sequence 2. -- Blessings for the Prophet Muḥammad are
invoked with the formula, "God's
blessingsandpeaceonhim"(ṣallāllāhuʿalayhiwa-sallam),consistentlyleav-
ing off the phrase "and his descendants" (wa-ālihi), probably signaling
Sunni affiliation---notably, a few pious epithets present in most other
manuscripts are also omitted, such as "the queen of all women" (sayyidat
al-nisāʾ) for the Prophet's daughter and ʿAlī's wife, Fāṭimah (§1.200).
Blessings for ʿAlī are invoked with the formula "peace on him" (ʿalayhi
al-salām). -- The added orations are not included. The added letter is
transcribed with- out flagging it as an insertion. The added sayings are
transcribed and titled in red with the line, "Extra texts added from an
excellent Iraqi manuscript" (ziyādah kutibat min nuskhah sariyyah
ʿIrāqiyyah). -- The final folios transcribe Yaʿqūb's, Ḥasan's, and
Fanjkurdī's verses in praise of Nahj al-Balāghah, probably a later
addition. -- Raḍī's explanatory remarks are prefaced with the line, "The
Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\] said." 13 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:64,
ms §3. 14 Faḍlallāh transcribes Yaʿqūb's verses (p. 316) and says they
"were written by Yaʿqūb in his own hand in his manuscript of this work,"
perhaps indicating that he had seen the verses in Yaʿqūb's manuscript
and thus, presumably, the rest of the manuscript too. 15 The 494/1101
dating is corroborated by the fact that the final folios contain
Yaʿqūb's and Ḥasan's verses in praise of Nahj al-Balāghah and the
copyist pronounces the formula of blessings for the deceased for the
former, and a prayer for the long life of the latter---thus confirming
the dating of the manuscript between the deaths of the two men, in
474/1081 and 517/1123 respectively. 16 The facsim. ed. has inserted
folios from a later manuscript to fill this lacuna---those are not
consulted in the present edition. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 35 \[\]ھor \[H\]: Rampur Raza Manuscript. Manuscript
dated 553/1158, located in the Rampur Raza Library in Rampur, Uttar
Pradesh, India, catalog no. 1190,17 in two parts.18 A beautiful
single-volume facsimile edition has been published under the auspices of
the Government of India's Ministry of Culture, with an introduction in
English, Arabic, Farsi, Urdu, and Hindi by the Library's director, S.M.
Azizuddin Husain (Rampur: Rampur Raza Library Publication Series,
1433/2012). A microfilm is owned by the Central Library of Tehran Uni-
versity, catalog no. 5046. The manuscript is copied from an earlier
manu- script dated 511/1117, transcribed by the eminent scholar
Faḍlallāh al-Kāshānī al-Rāwandī (d. 571/1175, author of a lost
commentary on Nahj al-Balāghah), which was copied directly from Raḍī's
own manuscript. Presumably copying from Rāwandī's manuscript, moreover,
the copyist of our manuscript tran- scribes in a colophon on the saying
at §3.354 (fol. 164r) Raḍī's contextualizing comments, prefaced with the
words, "\[Perused\] in Raḍī's copy ( fī nuskhat al- Raḍī)." -- The
copyist is ʿAbd al-Jabbār ibn al-Ḥusayn bin Abī al-Qāsim al-Farāhānī. He
transcribed the manuscript in Jawsaqān near Rāwand, in Isfahan. -- The
manuscript is almost complete in 169 folios: The first folio of Raḍī's
introduction is missing, as are a couple of folios from the first part
of vol- ume two, from the beginning of oration §1.191 to just before the
beginning of oration §1.192. There is water damage on the lower end of
the first few folios. -- The manuscript is written in clear Naskh
script, fully dotted, and vocalized, and has some corrections and
annotations in the margins. -- Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 2.
-- The added orations, letter, and sayings are transcribed,19 and all
three sets are flagged by a line that states, "Additional texts added
from a manuscript written in the lifetime of the compiler." -- Yaʿqūb's
and his son's verses are not present in the facsimile edition, though
they may be present in the original manuscript. 17 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī,
"Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:71, ms §17. 18 The first part contains Raḍī's
introduction to the end of oration §1.182, with a tag saying it is the
end of part one. The second part contains oration §1.183--190, followed
by the chapter on letters, etc., to the end of the book. 19 The sequence
of added orations in ms H is different than their sequence in the other
manuscripts, and the same as ms Y, viz., §1.238, 1.237, 1.233, 1.236,
1.234. These are fol- lowed by the phrase, "end of additional texts"
(intahat al-ziyādah), then another phrase, "\[another\] additional
\[oration\] from a Baghdad manuscript" (ziyādah min nuskhah Bagh-
dādiyyah), followed by the added oration §1.235. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 36 note
on the edition and translation -- Blessings for the Prophet Muḥammad are
invoked throughout with the for- mula, "God's blessings on him and his
descendants" (ṣallā llāhu ʿalayhi wa- ālihi). Blessings for ʿAlī are
invoked with the formula "peace on him" (ʿalayhi l-salām). -- Raḍī's
explanatory remarks are prefaced with the line, "The Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\]
said." \[\]يor \[Y\]: "Yaʿqūbī" Tehran University Manuscript. Manuscript
dated 608/ 1212, located in the Central Library (al-Maktabah
al-Markaziyyah) of Tehran University, catalog no. 1782.20 A facsimile
copy is preserved in the library of the Ṭabāṭabāʾī Foundation (Bunyād-i
Muḥaqqiq Ṭabāṭabāʾī) in Qum, catalog no. M/214. The manuscript was
copied from Yaʿqūb al-Naysābūrī's (d. 474/1081) manuscript,21 which was
copied from or checked against Raḍī's original manu- script.22 -- The
copyist is ʿAlī ibn Ṭāhir ibn Abī Saʿd. Place is not noted, but since
the manuscript derives from Yaʿqūb al-Naysābūrī's manuscript, it too
could be from Nishapur. -- The manuscript is complete in 193 folios,
also numbered as 386 pages.23 It is written in a rough but clear hand
and is fully dotted and vocalized. The orthography is archaic. It
contains numerous variants and lengthy annota- tions in the margins that
appear to be in the original copyist's hand. -- In the Sayings section,
the introductory phrase in most manuscripts preced-
ingeachtext---viz.,"ʿAlī,peacebeonhim,said"(wa-qālaʿalayhil-salām)---is
mostly, though not always, absent. -- Oration texts are arranged in
Sequence 2. -- The added letter is transcribed without flagging it as an
insertion, but the added orations and sayings, which are also
transcribed, are flagged by a line that states, "Additional texts added
from a manuscript written in the lifetime of the compiler."24 As for the
added sayings, the copyist states (p. 384) that he copied them from
Yaʿqūb's manuscript. 20 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:77, ms
§33. 21 As seen from the colophon on p. 2. 22 Another colophon states
that "Raḍī wrote in his own hand here on the margin of his \[orig-
inal\] manuscript" a lexical explanation for a word transcribed in
saying §3.436 (p. 383). There is a similar colophon for saying §3.355
(p. 359). Ṭabāṭabāʾī ("Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:77) says, "it appears that
\[Yaʿqūb\] copied his manuscript from al-Sharīf al-Raḍī's original
manuscript in his own hand." 23 The facsimile edition's sequence of
folios containing orations §1.88--111 is jumbled. 24 The added orations
are in a different order than several other manuscripts, presented in
two parts: The "Additional texts" title is followed by five added
orations (§1.238, 237, 233, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 37 --
ThoughcopiedfromYaʿqūb'smanuscript,themanuscriptdoesnotappearto
containYaʿqūb's or his son's verses---perhaps the folios that contained
them are lost. -- Blessings for the Prophet Muḥammad are invoked
throughout with the for- mula, "God's blessings on him and his
descendants" (ṣallā llāhu ʿalayhi wa- ālihi), and sometimes, "Peace upon
him" (ʿalayhi l-salām). Blessings for ʿAlī are invoked with the formula
"peace on him" (ʿalayhi al-salām). The pious epithet for Fāṭimah,
dropped from §1.200 of manuscript N, is also dropped from Y. -- Raḍī's
explanatory remarks are prefaced with the line, "The Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\]
said." 1.4 Secondary Manuscripts I have consulted nine further
manuscripts from the 6th/12th and 7th/13th centuries in order to
transcribe the initial few folios that are missing from all but Y of the
primary manuscripts, and for a further check of substan- tive variants
throughout. These manuscripts also have important scholarly pedigrees.
Among them, K was copied from the manuscript of the famous premodern
editor of texts ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Sakūn (or: Sukūn, d. ca.
600/1204).25 The following are details of my secondary manuscripts in
chronological order: \[\]لor \[L\]: Mumtaz ul Ulama Lucknow Manuscript.
Manuscript dated 510/ 1116, located in the Mumtaz ul Ulama Library in
Lucknow, India.26 A facsim- ile copy is located in the library of the
Theology Faculty (Dāneshkadeh-yi Ilahiyyāt), Ferdowsi University,
Mashhad, catalog no. 77. -- Copyist and place are not noted. The date is
written in a different hand on the margin of the final folio. --
Themanuscriptisalmostcompletein158unpaginatedfolios;thelastlinesof
letter §2.11 to the middle of §2.31.11 appear to be missing, while parts
of the 236, 234, in this order), followed by a line stating, "End of
extra texts" (intahat al-ziyādah), followed by another line stating, "In
a Baghdadi manuscript there is an addition from an oration by \[ʿAlī\]
in which he speaks of Muḥammad's family," followed by oration §1.235. 25
Ibn al-Sakūn was born in Ḥillah, and lived in Baghdad, Medina, and
Damascus. His biog- raphy is transcribed from Muḥibb al-Dīn Ibn
al-Najjār, Mīrzā Afandī, Yāqūt al-Ḥamawī, and other medieval scholars by
ʿAṭṭār in the Introduction (pp. 10--13) of his 2016 ed. of Ibn
al-Sakūn's Nahj al-Balāghah manuscript. 26 Listed cursorily by
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:67, ms §11; listed also by Waseem and
Naqavi, Nahjul Balagha, 30. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 38 note on the edition
and translation first folios, and most of the final eight folios, have
water damage. It is writ- ten in mostly clear Naskh script, fully dotted
and partially vocalized, with some annotations and corrections in the
margins. The first line of Raḍī's brief conclusion is transcribed as it
appears in the other manuscripts, but the next two lines, which are
blurred, appear to contain a different prayer formula. -- Oration texts
are arranged in Sequence 2. -- The added orations, letter, and sayings
are transcribed, and all three sets are flagged by a line that states,
"Additional texts added from a manuscript writ- ten in the lifetime of
the compiler." -- Seven lines of verse by an unnamed poet in praise of
ʿAlī's words, in the same hand, are appended after Raḍī's conclusion.
\[\]زor \[Z\]: Maulana Azad Aligarh Manuscript. Manuscript dated
538/1144, located in Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh Muslim University,
Aligarh, India, catalog no. 485,27 in two parts.28 A beautiful facsimile
edition has been pub- lished by Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh, and the
Cultural Center of the Iranian Embassy in New Delhi, 2011. A microfilm
is owned by Imam Reza Library in Mashhad. -- The copyist is ʿAlī ibn Abī
al-Qāsim ibn ʿAlī al-Ḥājj. Place is not noted. -- The manuscript is
complete in 173 folios. It is written in clear Naskh script, fully
dotted and vocalized, with some corrections and annotations in the
margins. -- A colophon on the final folio notes that the manuscript was
checked against the copy of a scholar named Afḍal al-Dīn Ḥasan ibn Fādār
al-Qummī. Sev- eral ownership marks are found at the beginning and end
of each of the two parts. -- Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 1.
-- The added orations, letter, and sayings are included but not flagged
as inser- tions. \[\]دor \[D\]: Imam Reza Mashhad Manuscript. Iranian
manuscript dated 544/ 1149, located in the Imam Reza Library in Mashhad,
catalog no. 13847, from the Waqf endowment of the library of Fāḍil Khān
al-Khurāsānī al-Tūnī (d. 1060/ 27 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī,"
5:69, ms §15; listed also by Waseem and Naqavi, Nahjul Balagha, 30. 28
Part 1 contains Raḍī's introduction to the end of oration §1.190, with a
line stating it is the end of part one. Part 2 contains oration §1.191
to the end of the book. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 39 1650).29 A facsimile copy is preserved in the library
of the Ṭabāṭabāʾī Foun- dation in Qum, catalog no. M/203, and a
microfilm in the Central Library of Tehran University, catalog no. 2134.
-- The copyist is Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Naqīb, who fin-
ished writing the manuscript in Sabzevar (previously known as Bayhaq, in
NE Iran, near Mashhad). -- The manuscript is almost complete in 183
folios, numbered in a later hand in 366 pages, with the first folio of
Raḍī's introduction missing. A couple of folios from within the first
oration (§1.1.2--1.1.7) and sayings §3.195--332 are also missing.30 --
The manuscript is written in clear Naskh script, fully dotted, and
mostly vocalized, and it has some corrections and annotations in the
margins. -- Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 2. -- The added
orations are not included. The added letter is transcribed with- out
flagging it as an insertion. The added sayings are transcribed and
titled in red, "Additional texts added from a manuscript written in the
lifetime of the compiler." -- The final folios transcribe Yaʿqūb's and
Ḥasan's verses in praise of Nahj al- Balāghah. \[\]قor \[Q\]: Iraqi
National Museum Manuscript. Manuscript dated 565/ 1170, located in the
Library of the Iraqi National Museum in Baghdad, catalog no. 356.31 --
The copyist is Muḥammad ibn Saʿīd ibn al-Ḥusayn al-ʿĀmirī. Place is not
noted. --
Themanuscriptiscompletein243folios,32writteninclearNaskhscript,fully
dotted and vocalized, with one- or two-word lexical and grammatical
anno- tations in somewhat blurred red, in the margins or between the
lines. -- Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 2. -- The added
orations are not included. The added letter is transcribed with- out
flagging. The added sayings are transcribed and titled in red,
"Additional texts added from a manuscript written in the lifetime of the
compiler." -- The final folios transcribe Fanjkurdī's verses in praise
of Nahj al-Balāghah. 29 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:69--70,
ms §16. 30 Ṭabāṭabāʾī ("Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:70) incorrectly states that the
last folios containing sayings §210--350 are also missing. 31 Listed by
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:71, ms §18. 32
Twofolios---containingsayings§3.345tothemiddleof
§3.352---aremisplaced,andcome at the end of the volume, after the
copyist's name and Fanjkurdī's verses. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 40 note
on the edition and translation \[\]سor \[S\]: Sulaymaniye Raʾīs
al-Kuttāb Manuscript 1. Manuscript dated 567/1171, located in the
Sulaymaniye Library in Istanbul, catalog no. reisul- kuttab 942.33 The
manuscript was part of the collection of Raʾīs al-kuttāb Aḥmad ibn
Muṣṭafā ibn Khalīl (Ṭāshkubrīzādah, d. 968/1561) whose ownership mark is
on the cover folio, along with his name in his own hand. -- The copyist
is ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad ibn Abī Saʿīd ibn Manṣūr. Place is not noted. --
The manuscript is complete in 172 folios, written in clear Naskh script,
fully dottedandpartiallyvocalized,withsomeannotationsandcorrectionsinthe
margins. -- Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 1. -- The first three
of the six added orations are transcribed, and the first fifteen of the
seventeen added sayings, without noting for either set that they are
insertions. The added letter is also transcribed without flagging.
\[\]چor \[Ch\]: Chester Beatty Manuscript. Manuscript dated 588/1192,
located in the Chester Beatty library in Dublin, catalog no. 5451.34 --
The copyist is Aḥmad ibn al-Muʾayyad ibn ʿAbd al-Jalīl ibn Muḥammad. The
place is not noted. An ownership notice on the cover folio with the name
Sadīd al-Dīn Yūsuf ibn Muṭahhar Ḥillī \[= al-ʿAllāmah al-Ḥillī
(d. 726/1325)\] is written in Persian, with the mark of a library whose
name is blotted out, also in Persian. -- The manuscript is complete in
169 folios. It is written in clear Naskh script, fully dotted and
vocalized, and has numerous marginal variants and anno- tations. --
Oration texts are arranged in Sequence 1. -- The added orations are
transcribed, as are the first fifteen of the seventeen added sayings,
without noting for either set that they are additions. The added letter
is also transcribed without flagging. \[\]آor \[A\]: Aya Sofya
Manuscript. Manuscript dated 598/1202, located in the Sulaymaniye
Library in Istanbul, catalog no. ayasofya 4344.35 -- The copyist is
Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥīm al-Fāmī al-Harawī. Place is not
noted. 33 Listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:72, ms §20. 34 Listed
by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:73, ms §22. The Chester Beatty catalog
incorrectly attributes it (à la Ibn Khallikān) to al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā.
35 Not listed by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on
the edition and translation 41 -- The manuscript is complete in 187
folios, written in clear Naskh script, fully dotted and vocalized, with
headings of new orations, etc., in red. It contains numerous marginal
variants and explications in the same red. -- Oration texts are arranged
in Sequence 1. -- The six added orations are not included.36 The added
letter is transcribed without flagging. The added sayings are
transcribed and titled in red, "Extra texts added from a manuscript
written in the lifetime of the compiler." -- Raḍī's conclusion is
followed by: the text of ʿAlī's seal rings; a further added oration (the
alif-less oration titled Badīhah or The Spontaneous), reported by
Muḥammad ibn al-Sāʾib al-Kalbī from Abū Ṣāliḥ(fols. 183v--185v); and
Yaʿqūb's, Ḥasan's, and Fanjkurdī's verses in praise of Nahj al-Balāghah.
\[\]تor \[T\]: Topkapi Manuscript. Manuscript dated 615/1218, located in
the Topkapi Palace Library in Istanbul, catalog no. Aḥmad iii 2556.37 --
The copyist is ʿAbd al-Ghafūr ibn ʿAbd al-Ghaffār ibn Aḥmad ibn
Marzawayh al-Kātib. Place is not noted. -- The manuscript is complete in
357 folios, with no lacunae, but the copyist has left out Raḍī's final
texts in each section: the manuscript ends at oration §1.224 (missing
eight texts, §1.225--232), at letter §2.72 (missing five texts,
§2.73--78),andatsaying§3.407(missingtwenty-onetexts,§3.408--429).The
added orations, letter, and sayings are also not included. -- Oration
texts are arranged in Sequence 1. -- The manuscript appears to be either
a special display copy or one used spar- ingly by Ottoman royalty: It is
written in clear, handsome Naskh script, fully dotted and vocalized.
Chapter headings are decorated with extensive gold illumination. Phrases
introducing individual pieces are centered and sized larger. Only two
variants, written in the margin in a different hand, are noted in the
entire manuscript. \[\]كor \[K\]: Sulaymaniye Raʾīs al-Kuttāb Manuscript
2. Manuscript dated 684/ 1285, located in the Sulaymaniye Library in
Istanbul, catalog no. reisulkut- tab 943.38 The manuscript is copied
from the manuscript of the aforemen- tioned scholar Ibn al-Sakūn (d. ca.
600/1204). Like S, this manuscript was also part of the collection of
Raʾīs al-kuttāb Ṭāshkubrīzādah (d. 968/1561). 36 Oration §1.231 is also
missing, and §1.177 is (mis)placed between §1.230 and §1.232. 37 Listed
by Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī," 5:77, ms §34. 38 Not listed by
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, "Al-Mutabaqqī." Used by ʿAṭṭār (he calls it ms "S-T") in his
2016 edition of Ibn al-Sakūn's copy of Nahj al-Balāghah (see his
description of the manuscript in ibid., 38--43). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 42 note
on the edition and translation -- Place is not noted, and a
gold-bordered rectangle after the date which may have contained the
copyist's name is pasted over with a blank piece of paper. -- The
manuscript is almost complete in 225 folios, with just a few folios
miss- ing in the middle (folio 85, oration §1.163--172). It is written
in beautiful and clear Naskh script, fully dotted and vocalized, with
red rondelles separat- ing the phrases, up to the end of folio 187.
There are many corrections and variants in the margins in different
hands, annotations in Arabic, Persian, and Ottoman Turkish. The title
folio has numerous ownership marks, Waqf notices, and hadith praising
ʿAlī. The title folio and final folio contain verses inthegenreof
renunciationof worldliness.Thefinalfolioalsocontains,after the sign-off,
additional texts attributed to ʿAlī. -- Oration texts are arranged in
Sequence 1. -- The added orations, letter, and sayings are transcribed,
without noting that they are insertions. -- An earlier unreadable form
of pious invocation attached to ʿAlī's name in the manuscript has been
systematically erased and replaced with "May God be pleased with him
(raḍiya llāhu ʿanhu)," presumably changed from a Shiʿite formula to a
Sunni one. 1.5 Manuscript Family Tree Based on four classification
matrixes that will be discussed shortly, I have con- structed the
following family tree to show the relationships between my four- teen
manuscripts. In conjunction with the matrixes, the relative chronology
in the stemma provides a visual of possible parentage and sibling
relation- ships. Some of the later manuscripts could derive from the
earlier ones, or from manuscripts related to the earlier ones.
Manuscript Groups: The manuscripts may be divided into two broad groups:
Group 1: primary manuscripts M and Y, and secondary manuscripts Z, S,
Ch, T, and K. Group 2: primary manuscripts Sh and N, and secondary
manuscripts D, Q, and A. N.B.:
primarymanuscriptHandsecondarymanuscriptLpossessfeatures from both
groups. Classification Matrixes: Four matrixes have been used to
construct the stemma, weighted in the following order: (1) the principal
matrix is variants in wording, then (2) sequence of texts, then (3)
presence or absence of added al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 43 = figure 1 Nahj al-Balāghah manuscript family tree,
5th--7th/11th--13th c. n.b.: -- Extant manuscripts consulted in this
edition are listed in rectangular boxes. Of these, the five primary
manuscripts---M, Sh, N, H, Y---are denoted by their assigned letter and
name. The nine secondary manuscripts---L, Z, D, Q, S, Ch, A, T, and
K---are denoted only by their assigned letter. -- Lost parent
manuscripts are listed in oval boxes. Of these, the known parent
manuscripts--- Yaʿqūb al-Nayṣabūrī, Faḍlallāh Rāwandī, and Ibn
al-Sakūn---are listed by name. Assumed parent manuscripts are denoted by
Greek letters: α for Raḍī's original manuscript, and β, γ, δ, and ε for
manuscripts copied or derived therefrom. -- Solid lines of descent
denote known parentage. Broken lines denote assumed parentage. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 I I- - - I- - - -
-I - - - - - - - - - - - - I r.-------- I I , \~I I s I I- - - - 1 I I
567/1171 Ch 588/1192 Tfo5/1218 684/,28_5* Z 538/1144 Y(Ya'qubi) 608/1212
------------\~------ I H(Rampur Raza) 553/1158 N (Nasiri) 494/1101 .. -I
L 510/m6 I \~ - - - - -I D 544/,149 Q565/1170 Sh (Shahrastani) 5th/11th
c.  A 598/1202 44 note on the edition and translation orations, and/or
(4) supplements. The place where a manuscript was copied would also have
been a useful matrix but unfortunately this data is mostly not
available. Raḍī, as we know, compiled Nahj al-Balāghah in Baghdad, Iraq.
Among our fourteen manuscripts, only two name the place where they were
written: near Rāwand, in Isfahan, for H, and Sabzevar, in NE Iran, for
D. Also, M's copyist was from Qum, Iran, so it may have originated
there; and Yaʿqūb (whose manuscript is the parent of Y) lived in
Nishapur, so his manu- script probably originated there. It should be
noted, moreover, that the manu- script genealogy is not always clear
cut, and a handful of apparently contra- dictory
positionings---discussed briefly below---complicate stemma relation-
ships. table 3 Matrixes of manuscript family tree Matrix Group 1 Group
2 1. Variants of words M Y {H} / {L} Z S Ch T K Sh N {H} / {L} D Q A 2.
Sequence of orations followed in present edition: M \[Sh\] / Z S Ch
\[A\] T K Sequence 2: N \[Y\] {H} / {L} D Q 3. Added orations present: M
Y {H} / {L} Z S Ch K absent: Sh N / D Q A \[T\] 4. Yaʿqūb and Ḥasan
verses absent: M Y H / {L} Z \[Q\] S Ch T K present: Sh N / D A n.b.: --
Manuscripts in this table are listed in chronological order: primary
manuscripts are listed first and followed by a slash; secondary
manuscripts are listed after the slash. -- Square brackets signal
manuscripts that in that particular matrix are not with their variant-
matrix group. -- Curly brackets are used for the Mixed Group
manuscripts, H and L. Matrix 1: Variants of Words Based on the variant
matrix, manuscripts are clustered in the two groups listed in Table 3
above.39 A sample list of seventeen substantive variants within the Nahj
al-Balāghah text, and variant-based manuscript distribution, is provided
in Table 4: 39 Note that H and L contain almost an equal number of
variants from both groups. A--- which is categorized in Group
2---contains three variants from Group 1. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on
the edition and translation 45 table 4 Nahj al-Balāghah manuscript
variants Text no. M Sh N H Y L Z D Q S Ch A T K Variants 1.27الإسهاب
الأسداد×الإسهاب الإسهاب الأسداد الإسهاب الأسداد الأسداد الأسداد الأسداد
الأسداد الإسهاب الإسهاب بالإسهاب / بالأسداد 1.27ا ً ّمذ اًمدس×ا ً ّمذ ا ً
ّمذ ا ً ّمذ ا ً ّمذ سدمًا سدمًا ا ً ّمذ ا ً ّمذ سدمًا ا ً ّمذ ا ً ّمذ اًمدس
/ ا ً ّمذ 1.80.11اً قافد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قافد اً قاهد اً قافد
اً قاهد اً قافد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قاهد اً قاهد / اً قافد 1.102.2يبكي
يشكي يشكي يبكي يبكي يشكي يبكي يشكي يشكي يبكي يبكي يشكي يبكي يبكي يبكي/
يشكي 1.161.1بديّة أبديّة أبديّة أبديّة بديّة أبديّة أبديّة أبديّة أبديّة بديّة
أبديّة أبديّة؟ بديّة بديّة بديّة / أبديّة 1.166أعرابكم أغرار كم أغرار كم أغرار
كم أعرابكم أعرابكم أعرابكم أغرار كم أغرار كم أعرابكم أعرابكم أغرار كم
أعرابكم×أعرابكم / أغرار كم 1.170.2هب ّ بُه ِ ت بُه ِ ت بُه ِ ت هب ّ بُه ِ ت
هب ّ بُه ِ ت بُه ِ ت هب ّ بُه ِ ت بُه ِ ت هب ّ×بُه ِ ت/ هب ّ 1.171.2أعملهم
أعلمهم أعلمهم أعلمهم أعلمهم أعلمهم أعملهم أعلمهم أعلمهم أعملهم غير واضح
أعلمهم أعملهم×أعلمهم / أعملهم 1.183.2صبّت ضنّت ضنّت ضنّت صبّت ضنّت صبّت صبّت ضنّت
صبّت صبّت صبّت صبّت صبّت صُبّت/ ضَنّت al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 46 note on the edition
and translation table 4 Nahj al-Balāghah manuscript variants (cont.)
Text no. M Sh N H Y L Z D Q S Ch A T K Variants 1.183.2النخلة النحلة
النحلة النحلة النخلة النخلة النخلة النحلة النخلة النخلة النخلة النخلة
النحلة النخلة النخلة / النحلة 1.196آكام إمام إمام إمام آكام إمام آكام
إمام إمام آكام إمام آكام آكام آكام آكام / إمام 2.10مِج َ نّ مُنج ٍ مُنج ٍ مِج
َ نّ مِج َ نّ مُنج ٍ مُنج ٍ مِج َ نّ مُنج ٍ مِج َ نّ مُنج ٍ مُنج ٍ مِج َ نّ مِج َ نّ مِج
َ نّ/ مُنج ٍ 2.28.2جاهليّتكم جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتكم×جاهليّتنا
جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتكم جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتنا جاهليّتكم
/ جاهليّتنا 2.45.4كالصنو كالضوء كالصنو كالصنو كالصنو كالصنو كالصنو كالصنو
كالصنو كالضوء كالصنو كالصنو كالصنو كالضوء كالضوء من الضوء / كالصنو من
الصنو 3.33الفاجر العاجز العاجز الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر العاجز العاجز
الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر الفاجر / العاجز 3.137 ×أمر ٱمرئ ٱمرئ
ٱمرئ ٱمرئ ٱمرئ ٱمرئ ٱمرئ أمر ٱمرئ ٱمرئ أمر أمر أمر / ٱمرئ 3. 237
×الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة×الإمامة الأمانة الأمانة
الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة الإمامة / الأمانة al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on
the edition and translation 47 Matrix 2: Sequence of Orations Our
manuscripts transcribe Nahj al-Balāghah's orations in two different se-
quences,andthesehavebeendescribedearlierasSequence1,whichisfollowed in
the present edition, and Sequence 2, which is not. Matrix 3: Added
Orations
ThesixorationsinsertedintoRaḍī'soriginal(§1.233--238)arefoundinallmanu-
scriptsinGroup1,exceptT(whichismissingallendtextsanyway),andtheyare also
found in H from the Mixed Group. The added letter (§2.79) is transcribed
in all our manuscripts and is thus not particularly useful as a matrix
for map- ping the family tree. Similarly, the added sayings
(§3.430--446) are also present in all our manuscripts except M andT.Two
manuscripts, S and Ch, include only fifteen out of seventeen added
sayings, and they may be more closely related to each other than to
others in their group. Matrix 4: Yaʿqūb's and Ḥasan's verses Yaʿqūb'sand
Ḥasan'sversesinpraiseof Nahjal-Balāghah arefoundinallmanu- scripts of
Group 2, except Q.40 In Sh and N, though, these are presumably later
additions, as these manuscripts predate the poets. Further supplementary
materials are also found in some Group 2 manuscripts: -- Fanjkurdī's
verses in praise of Nahj al-Balāghah are transcribed in N, Q, and A. In
N, this is presumably a later addition, as the manuscript predates the
poet. -- Inscriptions of ʿAlī's signet rings are transcribed in D and A.
nb: Lost Parent Manuscripts Someof
ourmanuscriptsderivefromthreelostparentmanuscriptstranscribed by the
following scholars: -- Yaʿqūb al-Naysābūrī (d. 474/1081), who copied his
manuscript from, or checked it against, Raḍī's original. Our manuscript
Y is copied from it, N's copyist consulted it, and the copyists of D and
A---because they contain Yaʿqūb's verses---may have consulted it or a
manuscript derived from it. --
Faḍlallāhal-Rāwandī(d.571/1175),whocopiedhismanuscriptin511/1117from
Raḍī's original. Our manuscript H is copied from it. -- Ibn al-Sakūn
(d. ca. 600/1204). Our manuscript K is copied from it. 40 Surprisingly,
Group 1's manuscript Y---said to be copied from Yaʿqūb's own
manuscript--- does not containYaʿqūb's verses. Perhaps they were present
in the originalY, and in H, and the end folios containing them are lost.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 48 note on the edition
and translation 2 Previous Editions From the late 1800s onward, Nahj
al-Balāghah has been printed numerous
times,includingtheprintingwithMuḥammadʿAbduh'scommentary,firstpub-
lished by al-Maṭbaʿah al-Adabiyyah in Beirut in 1885. Most Nahj
al-Balāghah printings are trade editions which do not mention any
manuscripts at all, and their texts contain unflagged insertions of
headings and words, as well as numerous errors. Two mistranscriptions
are egregious and stem from anti-Shiʿi bias: -- §3.174: The original,
transcribed thus in all the early manuscripts that I consulted and all
the medieval commentaries that I looked at,41 is as fol- lows: "How
strange! So, the caliphate can be justified through the Prophet's
companionship, but not through companionship and kinship together?"
(واعجباه أتكون الخلافة بالصحابة ولا تكون بالصحابة والقرابة .)In the
print editions, this is changed by dropping a few words in the
middle---ولا تكون بالصحابة ---to mean something quite different: "How
strange that the caliphate is justified through companionship and
kinship!" (واعجباه أتكون الخلافة بالصحابة والقرابة .)42 -- §3.237: The
original, transcribed thus in all my primary manuscripts, and all except
S and Ch of the secondary manuscripts, is as follows:فرض الله ...
الإمامة نظامًا للأمّة (God has mandated the imamate as a system of
governance for the community.) In modern printings, deriving perhaps
from the later manuscript tradition (cf. S and Ch, just mentioned), the
word imāmah (ima- mate) is changed to amānah (trustworthiness), by
replacing the letter "M" with "N."43 Modern critical editions have been
published by two scholars: -- Hāshim Mīlānī, Najaf: Maktabat al-Rawḍah
al-Ḥaydariyyah, 2009. Mīlānī consulted the manuscripts I have labelled M
and D, and two more from the 6th/12th century located in Iranian
libraries. -- Qays Bahjat ʿAṭṭār, Qum: Muʾassasat al-Rāfid, 2010. ʿAṭṭār
consulted the 5th/ 11th century manuscripts I have labelled M and N, and
two more partial, undated ones, presumably from the 6th/12th or 7th/13th
century. In a differ- ent edition (Najaf: al-ʿAtabah al-ʿAlawiyyah
al-Muqaddasah, 2016), in which he focused on establishing Ibn al-Sakūn's
vocalization of Nahj al-Balāghah, 41 E.g., Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, SharḥNahj
al-balāghah, 18:416, §185. 42 E.g., ʿAbduh, SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 502,
§190. 43 E.g., ʿAbduh, SharḥNahj al-balāghah, 512, §252. The original
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd commen- tary appears to have transcribed imāmah, and
the later manuscript tradition appears to have changed it to amānah: the
text before the commentary has amānah (Ḥ19:86, §249), but the
explanation (Ḥ19:90) has retained the original imāmah. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 49
ʿAṭṭārconsultedtwomanuscriptsderivedfromIbnal-Sakūn'soriginalmanu-
script, includingthe manuscriptIhavelabelledK,andanother,alsofromthe
7th/13th century. Although these are welcome and relatively accurate
editions, Mīlānī and ʿAṭṭār do not use my primary manuscripts Sh, Y, or
H, nor my secondary manuscripts L, Z, Q, S, Ch, A, and T. Neither
scholar flags the added orations or letter as insertions. Neither
constructs a manuscript stemma or lays out a concerted methodology.
Furthermore, they do not note the substantive variants in an efficient
manner: Mīlānī notes only some substantive variants; his focus is on
providing meanings of difficult words. ʿAṭṭār in his 2010 edition---an
otherwise excellent edition and remarkably free of typographical
errors---lists all differ- ences in vocalization. This is a redundant,
or, at best, a secondary exercise, and it has come at a cost: the
profusion of vocalization differences in the notes obscures the fewer,
scattered substantive variants. The original vocalization is
notascertainableinanycase,forthereisnoevidencetosuggestthatRaḍīvocal-
ized his compilation let alone to establish the exact vowels that ʿAlī
used in his oral deliveries. ʿAṭṭār also lists all variants noted in the
manuscripts' margins--- this adds to the reception data (albeit
sketchily, because we don't know for the most part when these variants
were added to the margins or by who), but it fur- ther obscures the
manuscripts' text collation. These editions are also not easily
available. 3 This Edition In formulating a new critical edition of Nahj
al-Balāghah, I have relied princi-
pallyonmyfiveprimarymanuscripts:thethreeearliestextant5th/11th-century
manuscripts of Nahj al-Balāghah, M, Sh, and N, as well as Y, which was
copied from a 5th/11th-century manuscript, and H, which was copied from
an early 6th/12th-century manuscript. As noted earlier, M is believed to
have been copied from a manuscript authorized by Raḍī, and the parent
manuscripts of H and Y are said to have been copied from Raḍī's own
manuscript. Substantial variants among these primary manuscripts are
relatively few in number. The manuscript history of the text is
extremely complicated, and each of the manuscripts passed through many
hands, so---despite best efforts to untan- gle study notices and
colophons---it is extremely difficult to fully tease out what
corrections were made, when they were made, by whom they were made, and
which other manuscripts or resources were used to make them. Also, it is
sometimes difficult to ascertain the original transcription from a later
cor- rection. Despite recourse to these precious early manuscripts,
then, it is still not possible to definitively determine the entirety of
Raḍī's original text (or, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 50 note on the edition
and translation for that matter, his sequence of orations). In the case
of some textual variants, the early manuscripts often present two
choices that appear equally plausi- ble in the historical, grammatical,
and rhetorical context. Indeed, oftentimes the copyists themselves offer
two possible readings, marked with the word maʿa (both), meaning both
readings, according to them, are equally plausible. However, using the
method described below, I believe I have constructed the close-to-best
version we can hope to attain---barring somebody finding Raḍī's
autograph manuscript! 3.1 Substantive Features of this Edition -- The
present edition relies principally on the five primary manuscripts M,
Sh, N, H, and Y. Of these, there is no one manuscript, and no one group,
which consistently gives an indisputably better reading. Although some
scholars have claimed one or the other of these as the best manuscript,
I do not agree that there is a clear frontrunner. So, where the primary
manuscripts differ, I
usemybestjudgment:wheretheyarestronglyweightedtowardonereading, I
prioritize that majority reading; where they are nearly equally
distributed, I choose the reading I deem most appropriate to the
literary and historical context. -- I footnote all substantial variants
occurring in my primary manuscripts. The
secondarymanuscriptsfromthe6th/12thand7th/13thcenturiesareinvoked only
for variants in the first folios that are missing from the primary manu-
scripts, and for the substantive variants listed in Table 4 above. --
Themanuscriptscontainnumerousvariationsinminorcomponentssuchas
conjunctions, prepositions, orthography, number, tense, and gender
within ʿAlī's texts, and more so within Raḍī's headers and explanations.
For these minor variations, I mostly follow M. I do not footnote these
variants except in the few cases where they make a substantive
difference to the mean- ing, for this would obscure the significant
variants while not adding to our understanding of the material. ʿAṭṭār
in his 2010 edition has listed all minor variations and the interested
reader can find them there. -- In sequencing orations, I follow the
primary manuscripts M, Sh, and others described earlier as Sequence 1.
-- I transcribe the inserted orations, letter, and sayings following
each of the three main chapters, under the sub-headingزيادة على الأصل
,set apart from the original text by the sub-heading and a smaller font.
3.2 Formal Features of this Edition -- Except for lines from the Qurʾan
and poetry, which are fully vocalized, I vocalize only those parts of
the text where the meaning and correct vocal- ization may not be obvious
to an educated reader of classical Arabic. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on
the edition and translation 51 -- For accessibility, I number the texts,
divide them into paragraphs, and add minimal punctuation. -- I present
ʿAlī's words in a larger font, and Raḍī's occasional comments in a
smaller font, to further distinguish between the two. -- I follow
standard rather than archaic orthography (e.g.,إسحاقversusإسحق .)
--Manuscripts differ in rendering pious formulae attached to the name of
God and exalted personages in Islam (details were provided earlier for
the pri- mary manuscripts). I follow the majority reading, which, I
believe, would follow Raḍī's original rendering. Note, however, that
some formulae may be copyist additions or modifications. -- A few lines
of poetry are cited in the text, and I identify their meters in the
footnotes. -- Section headings are original from the manuscripts, and I
retain them. The titlesprovidedinmost
Nahjal-Balāghahprintingsarelatercopyistadditions that are not found in
the earliest manuscripts, and I do not transcribe those. -- I have used
﴾﴿for quotations from the Qurʾan, and ⟨⟩for hadith, proverbs, and
half-lines of poetry. I have used ⟨⟩also for citation of phrases from
the text that Raḍī is explaining in his subsequent commentary, and for
variants in my footnotes. 4 Previous Translations Beginning in the
middle of the twentieth century, several English translations of Nahj
al-Balāghah, full or partial, were published in Iran and South Asia,
most of them produced via a previous Persian translation. They render
some lines effectively, but, for the most part, there is room for
improvement: they are inaccurate in places and their English is
frequently pedantic.44 Two par- tial translations---selections from the
sayings translated by Thomas Cleary (1996),45 and the Testament of
al-Ashtar (§2.53) translated by William Chittick (1981)46---are fairly
accurate and idiomatic. 44 E.g., §1.88: Ashbāḥ, the name of an oration
which speaks of the creation of sky and angels, in my translation,
"Ethereal Forms," which several prior translators have incorrectly ren-
dered as "Skeletons"
(https://www.al‑islam.org/nahjul‑balagha‑part‑1‑sermons/sermon‑91​
‑praise‑belongs‑god‑who, accessed May 18, 2023). 45 Cleary, Living and
Dying with Grace: Counsels of Hadrat Ali. 46 Chittick, A Shiʿite
Anthology, 67--89. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 52 note on the edition
and translation 5 This Translation Translating Nahj al-Balāghah has been
a supremely daunting task. The oceans of
meaninginfusedintoitslinescannotbefullyplumbed,foratranslationloses
native implications and associations, while at the same time adding
foreign ones. Neither can the eloquence of the Arabic be matched, for
the texture of the language and its rhythms and metaphors cannot be
reproduced. What I have attempted to do---given that any who set out on
this path, no matter how careful and prepared they may be, can only fall
short---is to come as close to the original as I can, both in meaning
and in beauty. Two guiding principles drive my methodology: First---to
quote Aristotle--- the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and
word-by-word translation fails to capture the clear simplicity of ʿAlī's
expositions. Au contraire, it can lead to a meaningless conglomeration
of high-sounding words, as has happened in prior renditions. Instead, it
is important for the translator to read each orig- inal Arabic sentence
as a single unit, to understand ʿAlī's concepts, with all their rich
nuances, as best as she can, then render them forcefully into cogent
English. Another aspect of this first principle is to bear in mind the
context--- historical, political, religious, cultural, and literary,
among others---which is crucial for accurate translation. Accordingly, I
have consulted the major Nahj al-Balāghah commentaries for lexical,
contextual, and idiomatic insights, the major premodern lexicons for
early usages of Arabic words, and historical and
literaryworks,aswellasbooksfromvariousothergenresfromtheclassicalAra-
bic library, for both the specific and the larger milieu of each text.
Yet another aspect of this principle is maintaining the formal register.
The Arabic of Nahj al-Balāghah is different than more informal
conversations reported from ʿAlī's time, or even the more formal
narrative prose of early histories; nowhere is the tone colloquial or
chatty. Its texts deal with the serious subjects of salvation,
succession, and war, and the translation attempts to maintain that
gravitas.Yet, it is also important to bear in mind that ʿAlī's orations
and letters were meant to be understood by their contemporary
addressees. Since the audience was usu- ally large and public,
accessible vocabulary was presumably chosen, and, with some exceptions,
rare words were avoided. Although the lexicon seems archaic to us now,
that was not the case in its time. Keeping my translation in line with
what I believe was the author's intent of clarity, I endeavor to render
the text into lucid, modern English. My second principle---which is
particular to literary translation---is to maintain, as far as possible,
the aesthetic spirit of the original. The first aspect of this principle
is to preserve where possible the rhythm, especially the paral-
lelismandpithycadences,of theArabicwords.Thesecondaspectistokeepthe
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 53 culture-specific imagery intact where possible, and
not substitute it with for- eign or anachronistic renderings. The third
and most difficult aspect is to bring out the desert-and-camel metaphors
that underpin the vocabulary, especially the verbs, which most prior
translations have erased. An especially compli- cated example in which a
heap of camel imagery is infused into a single verb, fawwaqa, is
§1.74:إنّ بني أميّة ليفوّقونني تراث محمّد تفويقًا .I have translated this
line with some (warranted, I think) prolixity as "The Umayyads stingily
throw at me my share of Muḥammad's inheritance, piece by piece, like
those who allow a camel-calf to suckle its mother only lightly, at
intervals." Others have expunged the imagery to translate the line as,
"The Umayyads are allowing me the inher- itance of Muḥammad bit (by
bit)." Yet another challenging line is §1.80.4:وألجم العرقwhich I have
translated as "Throats choke on sweat like a camel chokes on its
bridle-straps." Others have removed the underpinning animal image to
translate the line as, "Sweat would choke the throat." Bringing in the
underly- ing metaphorical associations of the Arabic words, while
preserving the clarity and vigor of the English, has called for a
delicate---and highly challenging!--- balance. Additionally in this
translation, I have: -- Added words to unpack the dense Arabic, but only
minimally, preserving apparently deliberate ambiguities. -- Modified
syntax and morphology for an idiomatic English rendering, --
Replacedpronounswithnames,andaddedthenameof fame,whereneeded for
clarity. --
ChangedsomepronounsforidiomaticEnglishrendering,sometimeschang- ing
third grammatical person to first, or singular to plural, when denoting
generichumans,pluraltosingularwhenprimarilydenotingthespeaker,ʿAlī, and
so on. -- Translated a single Arabic word differently in different
places, depending on
context---e.g.,ʿāmilistranslatedvariouslyas"governor,""agent,""administra-
tor,"or"tax-collector";ḥaqqissometimesrenderedas"truth,"andsometimes as
"right," while its opposite, bāṭil, is sometimes rendered as "falsehood"
and sometimes as "wrong." --
Wherethereferentisclear,usedlowercaseforpronounsandadjectivesrefer- ring
to God. -- Used my own translations of Qurʾanic verses, to maintain
consistency and to highlight a given verse's meaning in its context. --
Omitted pious invocations attached to the name of God, and of the
Prophet al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 54 note on the edition
and translation Muḥammad, ʿAlī, and other revered figures, for a
smoother reading (these are preserved in the Arabic text). -- Replaced
"Commander of the Faithful" in a few places with "ʿAlī." -- Retained the
masculine gender in generic references to humans, following classical
Arabic practice. -- Translated some technical religious terms
differently from their conven-
tionalEnglishrendering,tobetterreflectthespiritof theword:e.g.Itranslate
"Islam" as "commitment to God's will" (rather than "submission"); taqwā
as "piety" or being "conscious of God" or "godfearing" (rather than
"fear of God"); zuhd as "rejection of worldliness" or "indifference to
the world" (rather than "rejection of the world" or "asceticism"); and
bidʿah as "heresy" or "heretical innovation" and not simply
"innovation." -- Sometimes used the neutral form 'it' for pronouns
referring to the world (dunyā), while at other times, when the context
is clearly playing to the metaphor of the world as temptress, the
feminine 'she' (note that the word dunyā is feminine in Arabic). --
Translated the standard post-benedictions phrase, ammā baʿdu (lit. "As
for what comes after"), as "And now to the matter at hand." I have
removed the phrase whenever it occurs at the beginning of a text, and
sometimes also after the beginning "from" line (it is retained in the
Arabic). -- Removed the prefacing words, "ʿAlī said," from most places
in the Sayings section (they are retained in the Arabic). -- As in the
edition, presented the text of ʿAlī's words in a larger font, and Raḍī's
occasional prefaces and comments to ʿAlī's text in a smaller font. --
Used « » for quotations from the Qurʾan, and ⟨⟩for hadith, proverbs, and
half-lines of poetry. -- I have varied between the more formal "do not"
and the less formal "don't"--- and done the same for other
contractions---to best fit the register of each text. -- To identify
Raḍī's occasional comments, I preface them with his name fol-
lowedbyacolon,viz.,"Raḍī:".Thenotationappearsinsomemanuscriptstoo, in
some places with the first-person pronoun ("I say"), but more frequently
as "The Sayyid \[al-Raḍī\] said (wa-qāla al-sayyid)," where the use of
the hon- orific "al-sayyid" indicates a copyist addition. -- As in the
Edition, I have transcribed the additional orations, letter, and
sayings, following each of the three main chapters, under the
sub-heading "Additional Orations" (or: Letter, or: Sayings), set apart
from the original text by the sub-heading and a smaller font. Where
available from the commentaries and historical sources, I have pro-
vided in a note for each text, its context, date, and place; I have also
identified al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 note on the edition
and translation 55 unnamed individuals therein.47 Further details of
people, places, and terms are provided in the Glossary. Additionally, I
have provided notes to unpack cryptic
lines,butminimally,sincethisisatranslationandnotacommentary.Amodern
English commentary---particularly on the pithy sayings---would be a
wonder- ful addition to the Nahj al-Balāghah library, but that is a
project for another time! 47 When a text is dated to ʿAlī's caliphate
without a specific year, I have transcribed the dates of his full reign,
35--40/656--661, in order to avoid confusion. It should be noted however
that ʿAlī was pledged allegiance in the last month of 35ah, and most of
the texts from his caliphate are from early 36ah onward. ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ,
Maṣādir Nahj al-balāghah, contains further context for some texts,
accompanied by primary source quotes. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera
Qutbuddin, 2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_004 This is an open access
chapter distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license.
Detailed Contents Nahj al-Balāghah: The Wisdom and Eloquence of ʿAlī
Raḍī's Introduction p. 98 Section 1: Orations: Chapter containing
selections from the Commander of the Faithful's orations and directives,
including selections from his addresses that may be likened to orations,
spoken in charged gatherings, famous battles, and times of danger 1.1
Creation of sky, earth, angels, Adam, and prophets, and the hajj1 "I
praise God. Yet no speaker can articulate his praise" (الحمد لله الذي لا
يبلغ مدحته القائلون )p. 106 1.2 Following Ṣiffīn, state of the people
before Muḥammad, praise for the Prophet's family "I praise God, seeking
the completion of his favor" (أحمده ٱستتمامًا لنعمته )p. 114 1.3 "The
Roar of the Camel Stallion" (Shiqshiqiyyah), on the caliphate "By God,
that man donned its cloak knowing that I am the pivot to its grinding
stone" (أما والله لقد تقمّصها ٱبن أبي فلان وإنّه ليعلم أنّ محل ّ ي منها محلّ
القطب من الرحا )p. 118 1.4 Following the Battle of the Camel "Through us
you received guidance in the dark night" (بنا ٱهتديتم في الظلماء )p. 122
1.5 To ʿAbbās and Abū Sufyān following the Prophet's death, regarding
the succession "People! Cut through the waves of rebellion by boarding
the ark of salvation" (أيّها الناس شقّوا أمواج الفتن بسفن النجاة )p. 124 1
The majority of Nahj al-Balāghah texts do not have titles. The
descriptors here are thus my own, drawing on the content of the text, on
Raḍī's remarks if there are any, and context from the history books. For
each piece, I have also added the first line of both the translation and
the Arabic. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 57
1.6 When advised not to fight Ṭalḥah and Zubayr "By God, I shall not
behave like the hyena that, sleeping through a prolonged barrage of
pebbles, is captured" (ُ ب َ ّضلاک نوکأ ال هللاو مْدَ ّللا لوط یلع مانت ع
)p. 124 1.7 Censuring a group of his challengers "They made Satan master
of their affairs and he made them his partners" (اتّخذوا الشيطان لأمرهم
مِلاکًا وٱتّخذهم له أشراکًا )p. 126 1.8 Before the Battle of the Camel,
about Zubayr "He declares that he pledged allegiance with his hand but
not his heart" (يزعم أنّه قد بايع بيده ولم يبايع بقلبه )p. 126 1.9 Before
the Battle of the Camel, in response to a speech by Talḥah "They
thundered and blazed but that is the way of cowards" (وقد أرعدوا وأبرقوا
ومع هٰذين الأمرين الفشل )p. 126 1.10 During one of his battles "Hark!
Satan has mustered his host and armed his cavalry and infantry" (ألا وإنّ
الشيطان قد جمع حزبه وٱستجلب خيله ورجله )p. 126 1.11 Instructions to Ibn
al-Ḥanafiyyah at the Battle of the Camel, charging him with the banner
"Mountains may move, but you should not" (تزول الجبال ولا تزل )p. 128
1.12 Following victory at the Battle of the Camel "... Our fight has
been witnessed by a mighty host in the loins of men" (ولقد شهدنا فی
عسکرنا هذا قوم في أصلاب الرجال )..p. 128 1.13 Following the Battle of
the Camel, criticizing Basra and rebuking its people "You fought for the
woman and followed the camel" (کنتم جند المرأة وأتباع البهيمة )p. 128
1.14 In Basra, following the Battle of the Camel "Your land is close to
the sea and far from the sky" (أرضکم قريبة من الماء بعيدة من السماء
)p. 130 1.15 In Medina after he became caliph, on returning ʿUthmān's
land grants to the treasury "By God, even if the money had been spent to
wed women" (ءاسنلا هب جِّوُزُ ت دق هتدجو ول هللاو )p. 130 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 58 detailed contents
1.16 In Medina, when he became caliph "I guarantee the truth of what I
say and stand as surety for my pledge" (ذمّتي بما أقول رهينة وأنا به زعيم
)p. 130 1.17 Censuring self-styled authorities "The most hateful
creatures in God's eyes are of two kinds" (إنّ أبغض الخلائق إلى الله
رجلان )p. 132 1.18 Censuring scholars who follow their whims "When a
case comes to one of them, he passes judgment based on his capri- cious
opinion" (ترد على أحدهم القضيّة ... فيحكم فيها برأيه )p. 134 1.19 When
Ashʿath challenged him on the pulpit "What do you know about what goes
against me" (وما يدريك ما عليّ )p. 136 1.20 What comes after death "If
you saw what the dead see" (فإنّكم لو عاينتم ما قد عاين من مات منكم
)p. 136 1.21 The swift passage of life "The end is ahead of you and the
dreaded hour drives your caravan to the waterhole" (فإنّ الغاية أمامكم
وإنّ وراءكم الساعة تحدو كم )p. 136 1.22 Before the Battle of the Camel,
on his opponents' responsibility for ʿUthmān's killing "Hear me! Satan
has roared to his followers" (ألا وإنّ الشيطان قد ذمر حزبه )p. 138 1.23
Unimportance of wealth, value of kin "God's command descends from the
sky to the earth like raindrops" (فإنّ الأمر ينزل من السماء إلى الأرض
كقطر المطر )p. 138 1.24 Urging followers to fight for truth "By my life,
no softness or weakness shall hold me back from fighting those who
challenge the truth" (ولعمري ما عليّ من قتال من خالف الحقّ ... من إدهان
ولاإيهان )p. 142 1.25 Censuring followers for not fighting in the cause
of truth "I only have you, Kufa" (ما هي إلّا الـكوفة )p. 142 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 59
1.26 The Arabs before Islam, ʿAlī's situation when Muḥammad died, ʿAmr
ibn al-ʿĀṣ's corrupt deal with Muʿāwiyah "God sent Muḥammad as a warner
to all peoples" (إنّ الله بعث محمّدًا نذيرًا للعالمين )p. 144 1.27 Censuring
followers for not fighting Muʿāwiyah, after Sufyān al- Ghāmidī's attack
on Anbar "Jihad is a door to heaven that God has opened for his special
devotees" (فإنّ الجهاد باب من أبواب الجنّة فتحه الله لخاصّة أوليائه )p. 146
1.28 Eid sermon containing pious counsel "The world has shown its back
and proclaimed its farewell" (فإنّ الدنيا قد أدبرت وآذنت بوداع )p. 148
1.29 Censuring his followers, after Ḍaḥḥāk's attack on pilgrims at
Thaʿlabiyyah "People! You are together in body but divided in
aspiration" (أيّها الناس المجتمعة أبدانهم المختلفة أهواؤهم )p. 150 1.30
About ʿUthmān and his assassination "If I had commanded it I would be a
killer" (لو أمرت به لـكنت قاتل ً ا )p. 152 1.31 Instructions to
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās before the Battle of the Camel, to speak with
Zubayr, not Ṭalḥah "Don't speak with Ṭalḥah, for you will find him a
bull with twisted horns" (لا تلقينّ طلحة فإنّك إن تلقه تجدهكالثور عاقصًا
قرنه )p. 152 1.32 Four categories of men who seek to rule, pious counsel
"People! We live in a challenging age" (أيّها الناس إنّا قد أصبحنا في دهر
عنود )p. 154 1.33 At Dhū Qār, before the Battle of the Camel "God sent
Muḥammad when no Arab read scripture" (من العرب يقرأ كتابًا إنّ الله
سبحانه بعث محمّدًا صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله وليس أحد )p. 156 1.34 After the
Battle of Nahrawān, urging followers to fight Muʿāwiyah "Shame! I am
tired of rebuking you!" (أف ٍّ لـكم قد سئمت عتابكم )p. 158 1.35 After the
arbitration "I praise God even though this age has brought a great
calamity" (الحمد لله وإن أتی الدهر بالخطب الفادح )p. 158 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 60 detailed contents
1.36 Before the Battle of Nahrawān, warning the Kharijites "I warn you!
Take heed or you will soon be corpses strewn at the bend of this river"
(فأنا نذير لـکم أن تصبحوا صرعی بأثناء هذا النهر )p. 160 1.37 After the
Battle of Nahrawān, describing his precedence in Islam, and his
situation after the Prophet's death "I answered Muḥammad's call when
others held back" (فقمت بالأمر حين فشلوا )p. 162 1.38 On doubt's
resemblance to truth "Doubt is called doubt because it resembles truth"
(وإنّما سمّيت الشبهة شبهة لأنّها تشبه الحقّ )p. 162 1.39 Censuring followers
for not fighting, after the attack on ʿAyn al-Tamr "I am tested with
followers who do not obey my command" (مُنيت ُ بمن لا يطيع إذا أمرت
)p. 164 1.40 About the Kharijites' statement, "No rule save God's!" "The
statement is true, but the intent is false" (کلمة حقّ يراد بها باطل
)p. 164 1.41 ʿAlī and his enemy "Loyalty is honesty's twin" (إنّ الوفاء
توأم الصدق )p. 166 1.42 In Basra, following the Battle of the Camel,
pious counsel "People! I fear most for you two things" (أيّها الناس إنّ
أخوف ما أخاف عليکم ٱثنتان )p. 166 1.43 When advised to hasten in
attacking Muʿāwiyah "If I prepared to battle the Syrians while Jarīr is
still with them, I would close the door to reconciliation" (إنّ ٱستعدادي
لحرب أهل الشام وجرير عندهم إغلاق للشام )p. 168 1.44 Following Maṣqalah's
defection to Muʿāwiyah, after the Banū Nājiyah incident "May God strike
Maṣqalah with shame!" (قبّح الله مصقلة )p. 168 1.45 Eid sermon with pious
counsel "I praise God, never uncertain of his mercy" (الحمد لله غير
مقنوط من رحمته )p. 170 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 61
1.46 Supplication when marching on Syria "God, protect me from the
hardships of travel" (الّلهمّ إن ّ ي أعوذ بک من وعثاء السفر )p. 170 1.47
Prophecy about Kufa "I see you, Kufa, stretched like raw leather on
display at the Market of ʿUkāẓ" (کأن ّ َ مُ ت ةفوک اي کب ي دِّينَ مدّ الأديم
العکاظيّ )p. 170 1.48 Informing of his instructions to his vanguard, when
commencing the march on Syria "I praise God whenever night spreads and
darkens" (الحمد لله کلّما وقب ليل وغسق )p. 172 1.49 God's transcendence
"Praise God, who is concealed in unseen mysteries" (الحمد لله الذي بطن
خفيّات ِ الأمور )p. 172 1.50 After the arbitration "Revolt begins with
the indulgence of whims" (َ بَ ّتُ ت ءاوهأ نتفلا عوقو ءدب امّنإ ع )p. 172
1.51 Urging his army to fight at Ṣiffīn, when Muʿāwiyah blocked access
to water "By this act, they beg to be fed the victuals of war" (قد
ٱستطعمو کم القتال )p. 174 1.52 Eid of Sacrifice sermon with pious
counsel, sacrificial animal "Harken! The world has severed its rope"
(ألا وإنّ الدنيا قد تصرّمت )p. 174 1.53 The Medinans' eagerness to pledge
allegiance to him as caliph, rea- sons to fight the Syrians "They
crowded me like parched camels jostling at the waterhole" (فت َ َ ت ّيلع
او َ ّكاد ِ هلا لبإلا َ ّكاد يْم يوم ورودها )p. 176 1.54 To troops at
Ṣiffīn, allaying their impatience to begin fighting "You taunt, 'All
these excuses to avoid death!'" (أمّا قولـكم أكلّ ذلك كراهية الموت )p. 176
1.55 At or after the Battle of Ṣiffīn, describing Muḥammad's Companions'
sincerity and courage "We fought in support of God's Messenger and
killed our fathers" (انءابآ لتقن هللا لوسر عم اّ نك دقلو )p. 178
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 62 detailed contents
1.56 Prophecy and instructions for the future "After me, you will be
ruled by a man with a large maw and a massive belly" (موُعلُ بلا بْحَر لجر
يدعب مكيلع رهظيس هّنإ امأ )p. 178 1.57 To the Kharijites at Nahrawān "May
you be wiped out by sandstorms!" (أصابكم حاصب )p. 180 1.58 Before the
Battle of Nahrawān, when told that the Kharijites had escaped "Their
deaths are written on this side of the clear water" (مصارعهم دون النطفة
)p. 182 1.59 When warned about Ibn Muljam's intent to assassinate him "I
am protected by God's shield" (َ لَ ع ّنإو ةنيصح ةّنُج هللا نم َ ّي )p. 182
1.60 Censure of this world "Hear me! The world is an abode from which
you cannot be saved except within it" (ألا وإنّ الدنيا دار لا ي ُ سلَم
منها إلّا فيها )p. 184 1.61 Counsel to consciousness of God "Be conscious
of God, O servants of God, and outrace your imminent end with good
deeds" (وٱتّقوا الله عباد الله وبادروا آجالـكم بأعمالـكم )p. 184 1.62
God's transcendence "No state for God precedes another state" (الذي لم
تسبق له حال حالًا )p. 186 1.63 Instructions to troops at Ṣiffīn "Muslims!
Sheathe yourselves in God's awe ... bite down hard on your back teeth"
(معاشر المسلمين ٱستشعروا الخشية ... وعضّوا على النواجذ )p. 186 1.64
Following the Prophet's death, response to report about the Assembly at
the Portico "Did you not remind them of the Messenger's directive" (فهلّا
ٱحتجتم عليهم بأنّ رسول الله وصّى )p. 188 1.65 When Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr
was killed, and the Umayyads took over Egypt "My own choice for governor
of Egypt was Hāshim ibn ʿUtbah" (وقد أردت تولية مصر هاشم بن عتبة )p. 190
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 63
1.66 Censuring followers for not fighting, after Ibn Bashīr's attack on
ʿAyn al-Tamr "How long should I coax you and blandish you? How long must
I handle you gingerly as a young camel whose hump a heavy load would
crush?" (كم أداريكم كما تدارى البكِار العَمِدة )p. 190 1.67 In the predawn
hour of the day in which he was struck his death- blow "Sleep overtook
me as I sat, and the Messenger appeared before my eyes" (ملـكتني عيني
وأنا جالس فسنح لي رسول الله )p. 192 1.68 Following Ṣiffīn, censuring
followers for agreeing to a truce on the verge of victory "Iraqis! You
are like a pregnant woman who, at full term, delivers a stillborn child"
(يا أهل العراق فإنّما أنتم كالمرأة الحامل حملت فلمّا أتمّت أملصت ومات قيّمها
)p. 192 1.69 Invoking blessings on the Prophet and praising him "God,
unfolder of lands unfolded" (اللّٰهمّ داحي المدحوّات )p. 192 1.70 About
Marwān, when he offered the pledge to ʿAlī after the Battle of the Camel
"Did he not pledge allegiance to me right after ʿUthmān was killed?"
(أفلم يبايعني بعد قتل عثمان )p. 194 1.71 To the Shūrā Council, when they
resolved to install ʿUthmān as caliph "You know full well that I have
more right to the caliphate than anyone else" (لقد علمتم أن ّ ي أحقّ
الناس بها من غيري )p. 196 1.72 When the Umayyads accused him of
complicity in ʿUthmān's killing "Is the Umayyads' own knowledge of my
character not enough to stop them from injuring me?" (أولم ينه بني أميّة
علمها بي عن ق َ يفَ ر )p. 196 1.73 Pious counsel "May God have mercy on
the man who listens to wisdom and retains" (ىعوف اً مْكُح عمس اًدبع هللا محر
)p. 198 1.74 Response to a gift sent by Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ, ʿUthmān's
governor in Kufa "The Umayyads stingily throw at me my share of
Muḥammad's inheritance, piece by piece" (ُ يَ ل ةّيمأ ينب ّنإ فَوِّقونني تراث
محمّد تفويقًا )p. 198 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 64 detailed contents
1.75 A frequent supplication "God, forgive my sins---you know more about
them than I do" (اللّٰهمّ ٱغفر لي ما أنت أعلم به منّي )p. 200 1.76 To an
associate who cited astrological portents and warned him against
marching on the Kharijites "Do you presume to guide me to the hour in
which those who advance are shielded from injury?" (أتزعم أنّك تهدي إلى
الساعة التي من سار فيها صرف عنه السوء )p. 200 1.77 To the Basran army
following their defeat at the Battle of the Camel, oblique censure of
ʿĀʾishah "People! Women are deficient in faith" (معاشر الناس إنّ النساء
نواقص الإيمان )p. 202 1.78 Pious counsel "People! To reject worldliness
is to desire little" (أيّها الناس الزهادة قِصَر الأمل )p. 202 1.79 Censure
of the world "How do I describe a world that begins in weariness and
ends in death" (ما أصف من دار أوّلها عناء وآخرها فناء )p. 202 1.80 The
Radiant Oration (Gharrāʾ), lengthy pious counsel "Praise God, exalted in
his might and near through his grace" (الحمد لله الذي على بحوله ودنا
بطوله )p. 204 1.81 ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ's hypocrisy and ʿAlī's virtue "How
strange! The Harlot's son tells the Syrians that I have a streak of
foolish- ness" (ةباعُد َ ّيف ّنأ ماشلا لهأل معزي ةغبانلا نبٱل اً بجع
)p. 214 1.82 God's transcendence, paradise, pious counsel "I bear
witness that there is no god but God, who has no partner. He is the
first, for there was nothing before him" (وأشهد أن لا إل ٰ ه إلّا الله لا
شريك له الأوّل لا شيء قبله )p. 214 1.83 Pious counsel "God knows your
thoughts and discerns your feelings" (قد علم السرائر وخبر الضمائر
)p. 216 1.84 Pious versus immoral scholars, the Prophet's family
"Servants of God! The most beloved of his servants ... keeps his
passions under control" (عباد الله إنّ من أحب ّ عباد الله إليه عبدًا أعانه
الله على نفسه )p. 218 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 65
1.85 In Medina, early in ʿAlī's caliphate, describing the errant "God
has not crushed tyrants of any era except after a long respite" (فإنّ
الله لم يقصم جبّاري دهر قط ّ إلّا بعد تمهيل )p. 222 1.86 On the Prophet's
mission "God sent Muḥammad when an age had gone by without prophets"
(أرسله على حين فترة من الرسل )p. 222 1.87 God's transcendence, pious
counsel "God is recognized without being seen" (المعروف من غير رؤية
)p. 224 1.88 The Oration on Ethereal Forms (Ashbāḥ), on God's
transcendence, his creation of skies, angels, the earth, and prayer
"Praise God, whom withholding does not make richer" (الحمد لله الذي لا ي
َ فِر ُ ه المنع )p. 226 1.89 After ʿUthmān's death, when entreated to
assume the caliphate "Leave me and seek another" (دعوني وٱلتمسوا غيري
)p. 242 1.90 ʿAlī's virtue, prophecy of the Umayyads' harsh governance
after him "People! I have gouged out the eyes of revolt" (أيّها الناس
فأنا ف َ قَأت ُ عين الفتنة )p. 242 1.91 God's transcendence, the
Prophet's ancestry, pious counsel "Blessed is God! Vaunting aspirations
cannot attain him" (فتبارك الله الذي لا يبلغه بعد الهمم )p. 246 1.92
Muḥammad's mission "At the time when God sent Muḥammad as a prophet,
people wandered in confusion" (بعثه والناس ضلّال في حيرة )p. 246 1.93
God's transcendence, the Prophet's ancestry and mission "Praise God! He
is the first---there was nothing before him" (الحمد لله الأوّل فلا شيء
قبله )p. 248 1.94 After the arbitration, chastising followers for
disobedience, compar- ing them unfavorably to the Prophet's Companions
"God may have granted the tyrant a reprieve, but he will surely
apprehend him" (ولئن أمهل الله الظالم فلن يفوت أخذه )p. 248 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 66 detailed contents
1.95 At Ṣiffīn, censuring the Umayyads "By God, they will continue thus
until they commit every forbidden act" (والله لا يزالون حتّى لا ي َ دَعُوا
لله مَحْر َ مًا إلّا ٱستحلّوه )p. 252 1.96 Friday sermon early in ʿAlī's
caliphate, pious counsel "We praise him for favors past and seek his
help for what is to come" (نحمده على ما كان ونستعينه من أمرنا على ما
يكون )p. 252 1.97 Muḥammad and his family "Praise God who extended his
grace to all creatures" (الحمد لله الناشر في الخلق فضله )p. 254 1.98
God's transcendence, prophesy of an epic battle "He is the first before
every first" (الأوّل قبل كلّ أوّل )p. 254 1.99 Judgment day, prophecy of
coming seditions "On that day, God will assemble all who went before and
all who came after" (وذلك يوم يجمع الله فيه الأوّلين والآخرين )p. 256
1.100 Pious counsel, praise of the learned, prophecy of difficult times
to come "Look at the world with the eyes of those who have little
interest in her" (انظروا إلى الدنيا نظر الزاهدين فيها )p. 258 1.101
ʿAlī's support of the Prophet's mission "God sent Muḥammad as a prophet
when no Arab read scripture" (فإنّ الله سبحانه بعث محمّدًا صل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله وليس أحد من العرب يقرأ كتابًا )p. 260 1.102 In Medina early in
ʿAlī's caliphate, a leader's accountability to God, pious counsel "God
sent Muḥammad as a witness, a herald, and a warner" (حتّى بعث الله محمّدًا
شهيدًا وبشيرًا ونذيرًا )p. 262 1.103 Islam and its Prophet "Praise God who
paved the path of Islam" (الحمد لله الذي شرع الإسلام )p. 264 1.104 At
Ṣiffīn, praising the right wing's return to battle "I saw you turn away
from your battle lines and fall back" (وقد رأيت جولتكم وٱنحياز كم عن
صفوفكم )p. 266 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 67
1.105 God's majesty, the Prophet as a physician healing hearts, censure
of followers for errant ways, warning of evil times "Praise God, who
appears to his creation through his creation" (الحمد لله المتجل ّ ي
لخلقه بخلقه )p. 268 1.106 God as creator and sustainer, angels, humans'
blind love for the world, imminence and horrors of death, praise for the
Prophet and his family "Everything bows to him, and everything exists
through him" (كلّ شيء خاشع له وكلّ شيء قائم به )p. 270 1.107 Worship rites
and God's remembrance "The deeds that bring you closest to God are the
following" (إنّ أفضل ما توسّل به المتوسّلون إلى الله )p. 276 1.108 Censure
of the world "I warn you against this world, for it is sweet and lush
and surrounded by temp- tations" (فإن ّ ي أحذّر كم الدنيا فإنّها حلوة خضرة
حُفّت بالشهوات )p. 278 1.109 Angel of death "Do you sense his presence
when he enters a home" (هل تحس ّ به إذا دخل منزلًا )p. 282 1.110 Warning
of life's transience, censure of followers "I warn you of this world: it
is a home from which you will be uprooted" (وأحذّر ةعلُ ق لزنم اهّنإف
ايندلا مك )p. 282 1.111 God's favors, pious counsel, and this world
"Praise God who has linked praise with favors and favors with thanks"
(الحمد لله الواصل الحمد بالنعم والنعم بالشكر )p. 284 1.112 Supplication
for rain "God, our mountains are parched, and our plains have filled
with dust" (اللّٰهمّ قد ٱنصاحت جبالنا وٱغبرّت أرضنا )p. 288 1.113 The
Prophet, followers' reluctance to fight, warning of a despot to come
"God sent Muḥammad to call toward truth and bear witness to people"
(قلخلا ىلع اًدهاشو ّقحلا ىلإ اً يعاد هلسرأ )p. 290 1.114 Wealthy who fail
to help the needy "You don't spend your wealth for the one who has
provided it" (فلا أموالَ بذلتموها للذي رَزَق َ ها )p. 292 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 68 detailed contents
1.115 Praise of supporters, following the Battle of the Camel "You are
my supporters in the cause of truth and my brothers in faith" (أنتم
الأنصار على الحقّ والإخوان في الدين )p. 292 1.116 Chastising supporters
for apathy in the wake of a Syrian raid "What is wrong with you? What
you propose is not the right course or the proper way!" (ما لـكم لا
سُدّدتم لرشد ولا هديتم لقصد )p. 294 1.117 ʿAlī's virtues, pious counsel
"By God! I have been taught the transmission of God's messages"
(تالاسرلا غيلبت تمّ لع دقل هللات )p. 294 1.118 After the arbitration, to
the emerging Kharijite faction "This is how one who relinquishes a sound
position is rewarded!" (هذا جزاء من ترك العقدة )p. 296 1.119 Reminding
the Kharijites of their push for the arbitration, ʿAlī's ser- vice to
Islam "When the Syrians raised leaves from the Qurʾan on spears---using
trickery" (ألم تقولوا عند رفعهم المصاحف حيلة ً )p. 298 1.120
Instructions to troops ahead of Ṣiffīn "If any of you finds composure in
his heart when meeting the enemy" (وأي ّ ٱمرئ منكم أحس ّ من نفسه رباطة
جأش عند اللقاء )p. 298 1.121 Chastising followers for refusing to fight,
presumably after Ṣiffīn "I see you now, scuttling away like a group of
thorn-tailed lizards" (وكأن ّ ي أنظر إليكم ت َ كِشّون كشيش الضِّباب )p. 300
1.122 Instructions to troops during Ṣiffīn, exhortation to fight for
God's cause "Place the armor-clad in front and the unprotected behind"
(فقدّموا الدارع وأخّروا الحاسر )p. 300 1.123 To the Kharijites, saying
arbitration was sought from the Qurʾan "I did not appoint men to
arbitrate---I sought arbitration from the Qurʾan" (إنّا لم نحكّم الرجال
وإنّما حكّمنا القرآن )p. 302 1.124 Response to complaints when ʿAlī
levelled treasury stipends "Do you urge me to seek victory by oppressing
the people I rule?" (أتأمرون ّ ي أن أطلب النصر بالجور فيمن وليت عليه
)p. 304 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 69
1.125 To the Kharijites "Even if you insist---and you do so wrongly---on
believing that I have sinned and erred" (فإن أبيتم إلّا أن تزعموا أن ّ ي
أخطأت )p. 304 1.126 To Aḥnaf, foretelling epic fighting in Basra,
interpreted as the Zanj revolt "Listen, Aḥnaf! I see him marching with
troops that raise no dust" (يا أحنف كأن ّ ي به وقد سار بالجيش الذي لا
يكون له غُبار )p. 306 1.127 Transience of life, corrupt trade practices
"Servants of God! You, with all that you desire of this world, are
lodgers with fixed timespans" (نول َ ّجَؤُم ءايِوْثَأ ايندلا هذه نم نولمأت
امو مّكنإ هللا دابع )p. 308 1.128 To Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī when ʿUthmān
exiled him to Rabad- hah "Abū Dharr, you were roused to anger in God's
cause" (يا أبا ذرّ إنّك غضبت لله )p. 310 1.129 Chastising followers for
disobedience, ʿAlī's righteousness "You divided souls and fragmented
hearts!" (أيّتها النفوس المختلفة والقلوب المتشتّتة )p. 310 1.130 Pious
counsel "I give praise to God for what he has taken away and what he has
granted" (نحمده على ما أخذ وأعطى )p. 312 1.131 God's omnipotence, the
Qurʾan's guidance, Muḥammad's mission, censure of this world "This world
and the hereafter have submitted their reins to God" (وٱنقادت له الدنيا
والآخرة بأزمّتها )p. 314 1.132 Response to ʿUmar's query on personally
marching against the Byzan- tines "God has guaranteed to followers of
this faith that he will protect their land" (وقد توكّل الله لأهل هذا
الدين بإعزاز الحوزة )p. 316 1.133 To Mughīrah ibn al-Akhnas, who offered
to ʿUthmān that he would handle ʿAlī "You son of a barren, cursed
father" (يا ٱبن اللّعين الأبتر )p. 316 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 70
detailed contents 1.134 Early in ʿAlī's caliphate, on the Medinans
sitting out the con- flict "Your oath of allegiance to me was not sworn
on an impulse" (ةتْلَ ف ياّيإ مكتعيب نكت مل )p. 318 1.135 Preceding the
Battle of the Camel, censure of Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, reminder of
entreaties to ʿAlī to assume the caliphate after ʿUthmān's death "By
God, they have no cause to fault me" (اً ركنم اوركنأ ام هللاو )p. 318
1.136 Prophesy of epic fighting in Iraq "He will bend passion to conform
to guidance" (يعطف الهوى على الهدى )p. 320 1.137 During the Shūrā
Council "No one will outpace me in calling to the truth" (لن يسرع أحد
قبلي إلى دعوة حقّ )p. 322 1.138 Forbidding the shaming of people for
their sins "It befits those who are protected ... to show compassion to
sinners" (فإنّما ينبغي لأهل العصمة ... أن يرحموا أهل الذنوب )p. 322 1.139
Forbidding giving ear to rumors "People! Whoever knows his brother to
have strong faith and good ways should not give ear to the rumors men
spread about him" (أيّها الناس من عرف من أخيه وثيقة دين وسداد طريق فلا
يسمعنّ فيه أقاويل الرجال ) p. 324 1.140 Urging giving to the needy and
forbidding gifts to the undeserving "A person who distributes gifts in
unsuitable quarters ... earns only the praise of the immoral" (وليس
لواضع المعروف في غير حقّه ... من الحظ ّ فيما أتى إلّا محمدة اللئام )p. 324
1.141 Supplication for rain "Hark! The earth that carries you" (ألا وإنّ
الأرض التي تحملـكم )p. 324 1.142 Praise of prophets and Muḥammad's
family, censure of enemies "God singled out messengers and sent them
bearing the revelation" (بعث رسله بما خصّهم به من وحيه )p. 326 1.143 The
world's vicissitudes, heretical innovations "People! You are targets in
this world at which the fates shoot their arrows" (أيّها الناس إنّما أنتم
في هذه الدنيا غرض تنتضل فيه المنايا )p. 328 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed
contents 71 1.144 Response to ʿUmar's query on personally marching
against the Per- sians "In this matter, victory or defeat will not hinge
on how large the number of troops is or how small" (إنّ هذا الأمر لم يكن
ن َ صْرُه ولا خِذلانه بكثرة ولا بقل ّ ة )p. 330 1.145 Muḥammad's mission,
warning of difficult times "God sent Muḥammad to turn his servants away
from worship of idols" (فبعث محمّدًا بالحقّ ليخرج عباده من عبادة الأوثان
)p. 332 1.146 Before the Battle of the Camel, criticizing Ṭalḥah and
Zubayr "Each of the two wants the caliphate" (كلّ واحد منهما يرجو الأمر
له )p. 334 1.147 Pious counsel, just before ʿAlī's death "People! Each
person shall meet what he flees as he flees" (أيّها الناس كلّ ٱمرئ لاقٍ ما
يفرّمنه في فراره )p. 336 1.148 Sedition-mongers "Those others went right
and left, travelling the paths of error" (ّيغلا كلاسم يف اً نعظ اًلامشو اً
نيمي اوذخأو )p. 336 1.149 Pious counsel, coming seditions "I ask him for
aid against Satan's expulsions and evictions" (وأستعينه على مَداحِر
الشيطان ومَزاجره )p. 340 1.150 In Medina early in ʿAlī's caliphate, God's
transcendence, God's reli- gion "Praise God, who demonstrated his
existence through his creatures" (الحمد لله الدالّ على وجوده بخلقه
)p. 342 1.151 Enroute from Medina before the Battle of the Camel, pious
counsel "Such men, during the respite granted them by God, fall into
error" (وهو في مُهلة من الله يهوي مع الغافلين )p. 344 1.152 The family of
the Prophet "An intelligent person possesses a keen heart" (وناظر ُقلب
اللبيب به يبصر أمده )p. 346 1.153 Marvelous creation of the bat "Praise
God! Descriptions are too feeble to plumb his core" (الحمد لله الذي
ٱنحسرت الأوصاف عن كنه معرفته )p. 350 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 72
detailed contents 1.154 To the people of Basra after the Battle of the
Camel, his righteous- ness, oblique criticism of ʿĀʾishah, on sedition,
and pious counsel "At that time, whoever is able to bind himself totally
to God should do so" (فمن ٱستطاع عند ذلك أن يعتقل نفسه على الله فليفعل
)p. 352 1.155 Pious counsel "Praise God, who made praise the key to his
remembrance" (الحمد لله الذي جعل الحمد مفتاحًا لذ كره )p. 354 1.156 The
Prophet, the Umayyads, prophesy of a quick end to their rule "God sent
Muḥammad after a period without prophets" (أرسله على حين فترة من الرسل
)p. 356 1.157 ʿAlī's forbearance and care for the people "I protected
you well and strove to keep you safe" (ولقد أحسنت جوار كم وأحطت بجهدي من
ورائكم )p. 358 1.158 Placing hope in God, Muḥammad, Moses, David, and
Jesus "His command constitutes judgment and wisdom" (أمره قضاء وحكمة
)p. 358 1.159 The Prophet, pious counsel, life's transience "God sent
Muḥammad with brilliant light" (ابتعثه بالنور المضيّ )p. 364 1.160
Response when asked: How is it that your tribe has driven you away from
this station? "You man of Asad! Your mount's girth is loose, and you
fire without aim" (ِ لَقَ ل كّنإ دسأ ينب اخأ اي دَدَس ريغ يف لِسرُ ت نيِضَولا ُق
)p. 366 1.161 God's transcendence, human creation "Praise God, who
created his servants" (الحمد لله خالق العباد )p. 368 1.162 Advice to
ʿUthmān, a little before his death "People have gathered behind me, and
they have sent me to negotiate" (إنّ الناس ورائي وقد ٱستسفروني بينك
وبينهم )p. 370 1.163 The marvelous creation of birds, especially the
peacock, marvels of paradise "God created wondrous creatures" (اً بيجع
اًقْلَخ مهعدتبا )p. 374 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 73
1.164 Censuring the Umayyads, chastising followers for weakness and
stray- ing "Let your young emulate your elders, let your elders nurture
your young" (سَأَ تَ يِ ل َ ّ صغير كم بكبير فُؤْرَ يْلَو مك ْ كبير كم بصغير كم
)p. 380 1.165 Pious counsel, injunctions to care for the earth and
animals "God has revealed a book to guide you" (إنّ الله سبحانه أنزل
كتابًا هاديًا )p. 382 1.166 When urged to punish ʿUthmān's assailants
"Brothers, I am not unmindful of what you know, but how do I enforce
retribu- tion" (يا إخوتاه إني لست أجهل ما تعلمون ولـكن كيف لي بقوّة
)p. 382 1.167 Before the Battle of the Camel, ʿAlī's righteousness, his
challengers' iniquity "God sent a messenger, a guide, with a book that
speaks" (إنّ الله بعث رسولًا هاديًا بكتاب ناطق )p. 384 1.168 Injunction to
a Basran to pledge allegiance "If the people you represent had sent you
as a scout to find out where the rains are falling" (أرأيت لو أنّ الذين
وراءك بعثوك رائدًا تبتغي لهم مساقط الغيث )p. 384 1.169 Prayer and address
just before the Battle of Ṣiffīn "God, O Lord of the lofty sky and
layers of air" (اللّٰهمّ رب ّ السقف المرفوع والجوّالمكفوف )p. 386 1.170
Criticizing associates of the Camel, defending his right to the
caliphate "Praise God, from whom one sky does not conceal another"
(ًءامسٌءامس هنع يِراوُ ت ال يذلا هلل دمحلا )p. 388 1.171 Criticizing
associates of the Camel, defending ʿAlī's right to the caliphate, pious
counsel "Muḥammad was the trustee of God's revelation" (أمين وحيه
)p. 390 1.172 In Medina when associates of the Camel revolted, Ṭalḥah's
complicity in ʿUthmān's killing "I have never been one to be shaken by
threats of battle" (برحلاب د َ ّدَهُأ امو تنك دق )p. 392 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 74 detailed contents
1.173 ʿAlī's closeness to the Prophet, censure of followers for moving
away from God "O heedless people who go not unheeded!" (أيّها الغافلون
غير المغفول عنهم )p. 394 1.174 Urging godliness, adherence to the
Qurʾan, good deeds, and the licit "Profit from God's revelation"
(انتفعوا ببيان الله )p. 394 1.175 Criticizing the arbitrators "Your
majority opinion settled on choosing two arbitrators" (فأجمع رأيُ ملائكم
على أن ٱختاروا رجلين )p. 400 1.176 In Medina early in ʿAlī's caliphate,
God's transcendence, pious coun- sel, past events "No matter can
preoccupy him, no time can alter him" (لا يشغله شان ولا يغيّره زمان
)p. 402 1.177 On God's transcendence, in response to Dhiʿlib's question:
"Have you seen your Lord?" "Eyes do not see him through physical
observation" (لا تدر كه العيون بمشاهدة العِيان )p. 402 1.178 Censuring
associates for disobedience and apathy, condemning Muʿāwiyah and ʿAmr "I
offer praise to God for the affairs he has ordained" (أحمد الله على ما
قضى من أمر )p. 404 1.179 Condemnation of faction who left Kufa to join
the Kharijites "«Away with» them, «as the Thamūd were done away with!»"
(َ ب اَ مَك مهل اًدْعُ ب عِدَت ُدوُ مَ ث ْ )p. 406 1.180 God's transcendence and
creation, ubi sunt questions, God's proof, martyrs of Ṣiffīn, call to
jihad "Praise God, to whom all creation arrives" (الحمد الله الذي إليه
مصائر الخلق )p. 406 1.181 Praise of God, the Qurʾan's guidance, pious
counsel "Praise be to God, recognized without being seen" (الحمد الله
المعروف من غير رؤية )p. 412 1.182 To the Kharijite Burj ibn Mus'hir, who
shouted, "No rule save God's!" "Silence! May God disfigure you, you
toothless driveller!" (أُسْكُت ْ قبّحك الله يا أَثْرَم )p. 418 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 75
1.183 God's transcendence, the Prophet, God's marvelous creation,
includ- ing the ant and the locust "Praise God! Senses do not grasp him"
(الحمد الله الذي لا تدر كه الشواهد )p. 418 1.184 God's transcendence and
creation "Those who assign him a form have not acknowledged his oneness"
(هَفَ ّيَك نم هدّحو ام )p. 422 1.185 Praise of those "whose names are
recognized in the heavens but remain unknown on earth," prophesy of
difficult times "I would offer my father and mother as ransom for that
host" (ألا بأبي وأمّي هم من عدّة )p. 428 1.186 Piety, imminence of death
"People! I counsel you to be conscious of God and to give abundant
thanks for his bounties to you" (أوصيكم أيّها الناس بتقوى الله وكثرة حمده
على آلائه إليكم )p. 430 1.187 Kinds of belief, migration, ʿAlī's deep
knowledge, urging people to learn from him before the arrival of
sedition "Some people's hearts are firm and steadfast in belief" (بولقلا
يف اً ّرِقتسم اًتباث نوكي ام ناميإلا نمف )p. 430 1.188 Describing the pious
and urging piety, recognition of God, God's mes- senger, and his family
"I offer praise to God in thanks for his blessings" (هماعنإل اً ركش هدمحأ
)p. 432 1.189 Urging piety and preparation for the hereafter "Praise
God, whose praise is pervasive" (الحمد الله الفاشي حمدُه )p. 436 1.190
The Crushing Oration (Qāṣiʿah) containing censure of Lucifer, tribal
factionalism, and pride, on lessons provided by past nations who
incurred exemplary punishments, Moses' and Adam's humility, place- ment
of God's Sacred House in a barren land, ubi sunt, chastisement of
Muslims for straying from the path of truth, and description of ʿAlī's
closeness to the Prophet "Praise God, who donned robes of might and
pride" (الحمد لله الذي لبس العزّوالـكبرياء )p. 438 1.191 Oration to
Hammām, describing the truly pious "When God created people ... The
pious in this world are people of virtue" (فالمتّقون فيها هم أهل الفضائل
)p. 460 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 76 detailed contents
1.192 Hypocrites who feign faith "We praise God for having guided us
toward obedience" (نحمده على ما وَفّق له من الطاعة )p. 466 1.193 Pious
counsel "Praise God! He has revealed traces of his authority" (الحمد لله
الذي أظهر من آثار سلطانه )p. 466 1.194 The Prophet's mission, pious
counsel "God sent Muḥammad when no waymark was raised" (بعثه حين لا علم
قائم )p. 468 1.195 ʿAlī's loyalty and special closeness to the Prophet
"Muḥammad's true companions know" (ولقد علم المستحفظون من أصحاب محمّد
)p. 470 1.196 Urging piety, God's knowledge, Islam, Muḥammad's mission,
the Qurʾan "He knows the bellowing of beasts in the forest" (تاوَ لَفلا يف
شوحولا جيجَع ملعي )p. 470 1.197 Ritual prayer, the alms-levy, and
upholding trust "Be diligent in the matter of the ritual prayer"
(تعاهدوا أمر الصلاة وحافظوا عليها )p. 476 1.198 Condemning Muʿāwiyah,
declaring his own uprightness "By God, Muʿāwiyah is not more astute than
I, but he deceives and lies" (والله ما معاوية بأدهى منّي ولـكنّه يغدر
ويفجر )p. 478 1.199 Dissociating from evil people, Thamūd's slaughter of
God's camel mare "People! Do not be nervous about following the path of
guidance because its followers are few" (أيّها الناس لا تستوحشوا في طريق
الهدى لقل ّ ة أهله )p. 478 1.200 Address to the Prophet at his
graveside, after the death of Fāṭimah "Salutations to you, Messenger of
God, from me and from your daughter who has come to stay with you"
(السلام عليك يا رسول الله عنّي وعن ٱبنتك النازلة في جوارك )p. 478 1.201
Pious counsel, preparation for the hereafter "People! The world is a
passage and the hereafter your permanent home" (أيّها الناس إنّما الدنيا
دار مجاز والآخرة دار قرار )p. 480 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 77
1.202 Pious counsel, nearness of death "Gather your supplies---May God
have mercy on you!---for the call has come to depart" (تجهّزوا رحمكم الله
فقد نودي فيكم بالرحيل )p. 480 1.203 To Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, who rebuked
ʿAlī for levelling stipends "You rebuke me for a small matter" (لقد
نقمتما يسيرًا )p. 480 1.204 To supporters at Ṣiffīn who cursed the
Syrians "I don't like you to curse! Rather, describe their deeds" (إن ّ
ي أكره لـكم أن تكونوا سبّابين )p. 482 1.205 At Ṣiffīn, when Ḥasan rushed
into the fray "Help me! Restrain this lad!" (اِمْلـِكُوا عنّي هذا الغلام
)p. 484 1.206 At Ṣiffīn, when ʿAlī's army insisted on accepting
Muʿāwiyah's call for arbitration "People! You have followed my command
... but now warfare has worn you out" (أيّها الناس إنّه لم يزل أمري معكم
على ما أحب ّ حتّى نَه ِ كَتْكم الحرب )p. 484 1.207 ʿAlāʾ al-Ḥārithī's lavish
house, his brother ʿĀṣim's self-denial "What will you do with this large
house here in this world?" (ما كنت تصنع بسعة هذه الدار في الدنيا )p. 484
1.208 Four kinds of hadith reporters "Reports current among people today
include both the right and the wrong" (ً لطابو ا ً ّقح سانلا يديأ يف ّنإ
ا )p. 486 1.209 God's sublime craftsmanship "Through his supreme power
and sublime and wondrous craftsmanship, God produced dry, solid earth
from the raging, crashing, ocean masses" (وكان من ٱقتدار جبروته وبديع
لطائف صنعته أن جعل من ماء اليَمّالزاخر المتراكِم المتقاصِف َ بَ ي سًا جامدًا
)p. 488 1.210 For God to bear witness against those who were holding
back from fighting for the truth "God! I ask you, O greatest witness, to
bear witness over any of your servants who hear my words" (ةلداعلا
انتلاقم عمس كدابع نم دبع امـُ ّيأ ّمهّٰللا )p. 490 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 78
detailed contents 1.211 God's transcendence, praise of the Prophet
"Praise God---exalted beyond comparisons to created beings" (الحمد لله
العليّ عن شبه المخلوقين )p. 490 1.212 Praise for those entrusted with
preserving God's knowledge "I testify that God is the fount of justice"
(وأشهد أنّه ع َ دْلٌ ع َ دَل )p. 492 1.213 ʿAlī's frequent supplication
"Praise God who brought me to this morning alive and healthy" (اًميقس الو
اً تّيم يب حبصي مل يذلا هللا دمحلا )p. 492 1.214 At Ṣiffīn, describing
ʿAlī's and his subjects' rights, forbidding flattery "God has given me
rights over you ... you have rights over me" (مكيلع يذلا لثم ّقحلا نم
ّيلع مكـلو ... ا ً ّقح مكيلع يل هللا لعج دقف )p. 494 1.215 After the
Battle of the Camel, describing opponents' crimes in Basra "God! I ask
your help against the Quraysh! They have severed my kinship" (اللّٰهمّ إن ّ
ي أستعديك على قريش فإنّهم قد قطعوا رحمي )p. 498 1.216 After the Battle of
the Camel, while passing corpses of Ṭalḥah and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAttāb
"Abū Muḥammad sleeps here this morning, an exile from his home!" (لقد
أصبح أبو محمّد بهذا المكان غريبًا )p. 500 1.217 A pious man "This man
resuscitated his intellect and killed his sentient soul" (قد أحيا عقله
وأمات نفسه )p. 500 1.218 Horrors of death, reciting Q Takāthur 102:1--2:
«You are obsessed with gathering more and more until you visit your
graves.» "What a goal, and how distant!" (ياله مَرامًا ما أبعده )p. 500
1.219 Those who remember God, reciting Q Nūr 24:37: «They are men whom
neither commerce nor trade distract from God's remem- brance.» "God has
made his remembrance the burnish for your hearts" (إنّ الله سبحانه جعل
الذ كر جِلاء للقلوب )p. 506 1.220 Arrogant humans, reciting Q Infiṭār
82:6: «O human, what has deceived you into neglecting your Generous
Lord?» "Of all who could be questioned, you have the most unstable
arguments" (أَدْحَض ُ مسؤولٍ حجّةً )p. 508 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed
contents 79 1.221 ʿAlī's refusal to give treasury funds to ʿAqīl, or to
accept Ashʿath's inap- propriate gift "By God! I would prefer to lie on
a bed of three-pronged Saʿdān thorns" (والله لأن أبيت على حَسَك السعدان
)p. 512 1.222 Supplication for honest wealth "God! Protect my
countenance through prosperity" (اللّٰهمّ صُن ْ وجهي باليسار )p. 514 1.223
Censure of this world "This is a residence encircled by trials and
renowned for deceit" (دار بالبلاء محفوفة وبالغدر معروفة )p. 514 1.224
Supplication for comfort and guidance "God! You are the greatest
comforter for those who love you" (اللّٰهمّ إنّك آنس الآنسين لأوليائك
)p. 516 1.225 An upright Companion "May God cherish the land that
produced that man!" (لله بلاد فلان )p. 516 1.226 The fervor of the
pledge to him as caliph "You pulled my hand toward you, and I resisted"
(وبسطتم يدي فكففتها )p. 516 1.227 Consciousness of God, approaching
death, and renunciants "Consciousness of God is the key to
righteousness" (فإنّ تقوى الله مفتاح سداد )p. 518 1.228 At Dhū Qār before
the Battle of the Camel, praising the Prophet "God's Messenger
proclaimed what he had been commanded to pro- claim" (فصدع بما أُمر به
)p. 520 1.229 To ʿAbdallāh ibn Zamaʿah who asked for money from the
trea- sury "These funds do not belong to me, and they do not belong to
you" (إنّ هذا المال ليس لي ولا لك )p. 520 1.230 The Prophet's family,
people of ʿAlī's age "Hark! The tongue is but an instrument wielded by
men" (ألا إنّ اللسان ب َ ض ْ عَة من الإنسان )p. 520 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 80
detailed contents 1.231 Differences among people according to the clay
from which they are fashioned "What differentiates them is the source of
their clay" (إنّما فرّق بينهم مبادئ طينهم )p. 522 1.232 Address to the
Prophet while preparing his body for burial "May my father and mother
give their lives for you! Your death has cut short what the death of no
other has" (بأبي أنت وأمّي لقد ٱنقطع بموتك ما لم ينقطع بموت غيرك )p. 522
Additional Orations p. 524 Section 2: Letters: Chapter containing
selections from the Commander of the Faithful's dispatches and letters
to his enemies and his regional governors, including selections from
instructions to his tax-collectors and testaments to his family and
companions 2.1 To the people of Kufa, as ʿAlī marched on Iraq from
Medina, on events preceding and after ʿUthmān's death "I write to inform
you of what happened to ʿUthmān" (فإن ّ ي أخبر كم عن أمر عثمان )p. 530
2.2 To the people of Kufa, after the victory at the Battle of the Camel
at Basra "Residents of Kufa, may God reward you on behalf of your
Prophet's family!" (وجزاكم الله من أهل مصرٍ عن أهل بيت نبيّكم )p. 532 2.3
To his judge, Shurayḥ, who had just bought a large house: a "contract"
"Shurayḥ, soon there will come to you one who will not look at your
written con- tract" (يا شريح أما إنّه سيأتيك من لا ينظر في كتابك )p. 532
2.4 To Ibn Ḥunayf, governor of Basra, when Ṭalḥah, Zubayr, and ʿĀʾishah
marched there, and many residents turned against ʿAlī "If they reenter
the canopy of obedience, then that is what we desire" (فإن عادوا إلى ظلّ
الطاعة فذاك الذي نحب ّ )p. 534 2.5 To Ashʿath, governor of Azerbaijan,
who had embezzled treasury funds "Your governorship is not a meal for
you to devour" (وإنّ عملك ليس لك بطُعمة )p. 534 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed
contents 81 2.6 Sent with Jarīr following the Battle of the Camel, to
Muʿāwiyah, per- suading him to pledge allegiance "The same people who
pledged allegiance to Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, and ʿUthmān pledged allegiance to
me" (إنّه بايعني القوم الذين بايعوا أبا بكر وعمر وعثمان )p. 536 2.7 To
Muʿāwiyah, toward the end of the Battle of Ṣiffīn "I have received from
you a string of advice, enclosed in an embroidered epistle" (ةرَ ّبـحم
ةلاسرو ةل َ ّصَوُم ةظعوم كنم ينتتأ دقف )p. 536 2.8 To Jarīr, emissary to
Muʿāwiyah, before the Battle of Ṣiffīn, pressing for a decision "When
you receive my letter, tell Muʿāwiyah that he must take a final
decision" (فإذا أتاك كتابي فٱحمل معاوية على الفصل )p. 538 2.9 Before the
Battle of Ṣiffīn to Muʿāwiyah, who had accused ʿAlī of envy- ing the
earlier caliphs "Our tribe decided to kill our Prophet and extirpate our
root" (فأراد قومنا قتل نبيّنا وٱجتياح أصلنا )p. 538 2.10 To Muʿāwiyah,
just before marching to Ṣiffīn "How will you fare when the robes with
which this world adorns herself ... are stripped off?" (وكيف أنت صانع
إذا تكشّفت عنك جلابيب ما أنت فيه من دنيا قد تبهّجت بزينتها )p. 540 2.11
Instructions sent from ʿAlī's camp at Nukhaylah to Ziyād ibn al-Naḍr and
Shurayḥ, commanders of his vanguard to Syria "When you reach the enemy,
or when they reach you, set up camp just before the high ground" (فإذا
نزلتم بعدوّ أو نزل بكم فليكن معسكر ُ بُ ق يف مك ل الأشراف )p. 542 2.12
Instructions sent from Kufa to Maʿqil, commander of troops who were
likely sent against the Kharijite Ḥurayth in Ramhormoz "Fear God, whom
you must meet ... and fight only those who fight you" (اتّق الله الذي لا
ب ُ كلتاق نم اّلإ ّنلتاقت الو ... هئاقل نم كل َ ّد )p. 542 2.13 To Ziyād
ibn al-Naḍr and Shurayḥ, commanders of the vanguard to Syria, appointing
Ashtar over them "I have appointed Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar over
both of you" (وقد أمّرت عليكما ... مالك بن الحارث الأشتر )p. 544 2.14
Instructions to the army just before the Battle of Ṣiffīn "Don't attack
them unless they attack you first" (لا تقاتلوهم حتّى يبدؤو كم )p. 544
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 82 detailed contents
2.15 Battlefield supplication "God, it is to you that our hearts flow"
(اللّٰهمّ إليك أَفْضَت ِ القلوب )p. 544 2.16 Instructions to the army at the
Battle of Ṣiffīn "Don't hesitate to retreat then assail, to withdraw
then attack" (لا ت َ شْت َ َ ف مكيلع َ ّن َ ّد ةَ ّرَك اهدعبٌةَ ّر )p. 546
2.17 To Muʿāwiyah at Ṣiffīn, refusing to make him governor of Syria,
deny- ing that they were peers "You demand Syria, but I'm not about to
give you today what I refused you yes- terday" (ّ نإفَماشلا َ ّيلإ كبلط
اّمأف ي لم أكن لِأُعطيك اليوم ما منعت ُ ك أمس )p. 546 2.18 After the Battle
of the Camel to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, governor of Basra, instructing
kindness to Tamīm tribesmen "Know that Basra is where Iblīs landed after
his fall from grace" (وٱعلم أنّ البصرة مَهبِط إبليس )p. 548 2.19 To ʿAmr
ibn Salamah, governor of Isfahan, in rebuke for harshness to the
populace "The Dihqān landowners in your province have complained of your
harshness" (فإنّ دَهَاقِين أهل بلدك شَكَوْا منك غلظة )p. 548 2.20 To Ziyād,
deputy governor of Basra, warning against misappropriating treasury
funds "I swear this by God, in all truth: If I hear that you have
misappropriated funds" (وإن ّ تْنُخ كّنأ ينغلب نئل اً قداص اًمسق هللاب مسقأ ي
َ من ف َ يْء المسلمين )p. 550 2.21 To Ziyād, deputy governor of Basra,
warning against extravagance "Turn from extravagance to moderation" (فدَعِ
الإسراف مقتصدًا )p. 550 2.22 To ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās in Mecca,
following his misappropriation of treasury funds, counselling focus on
the hereafter "A man is gladdened by obtaining a thing that he was not
going to lose" (فإنّ المرء يسرّه دَرَك ما لم يكن ليفوته ويسوءه فوت ما لم يكن
ليدر كه )p. 550 2.23 Testament to family and close associates after the
death blow "This is my testament to you: Do not assign partners to God"
(اً ئيش هللاب اوكرشت اّلأ مكـل يتّيصو )p. 552 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed
contents 83 2.24 ʿAlī's will, written after Ṣiffīn, regarding
distribution of properties "This is what I---God's servant, ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib, Commander of the Faithful--- have directed with regard to my
property in the pursuance of God's pleasure" (هذا ما أمر به عبد الله عليّ
بن أبي طالب أمير المؤمنين في ماله ٱبتغاء وجه الله )p. 552 2.25
Instructions to tax collectors about compassion to subjects when
assessing their herds, and care while bringing animals to the trea- sury
"Set out in consciousness of God" (انطلق على تقوى الله )p. 554 2.26 To
Mikhnaf, sent to collect taxes, warning against abusing subjects or
misappropriating funds "ʿAlī commands his tax collector to be conscious
of God in private affairs and hidden acts" (أمره بتقوى الله في سرائر
أمره وخفيّات أعماله )p. 558 2.27 To Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr on his
appointment as governor of Egypt, instructing piety, fairness, and
kindness "Lower your wing over them" (فٱخفض لهم جناحك )p. 558 2.28
Before the Battle of Ṣiffīn to Muʿāwiyah, who again accused ʿAlī of envy
toward the first three caliphs, virtues of the Prophet's family,
iniquities of Muʿāwiyah's clan "I received your letter in which you
speak of how God selected Muḥam- mad" (فقد أتاني كتابك تذ كر فيه ٱصطفاء
الله محمّدًا )p. 562 2.29 To the people of Basra, following Muʿāwiyah's
seizure of Egypt, when Muʿāwiyah sent Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī to foment dissent
in Basra, and ʿAlī's commander Jāriyah defeated and killed him "You know
this well: You severed your rope of allegiance earlier and seceded from
the community" (وقد كان من ٱنتشار حبلـكم وشقاقكم )p. 570 2.30 To
Muʿāwiyah, presumably before the Battle of Ṣiffīn, persuading him to
obedience "Fear God in all that you do" (فٱتّق الله فيما لديك )p. 572
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 84 detailed contents
2.31 The Testament of Ḥasan, written on the way back from Ṣiffīn,
contain- ing lengthy pious counsel "From a father who admits the power
of time" (من الوالد الفان المقرّللزمان )p. 572 2.32 To Muʿāwiyah,
presumably in the lead-up to Ṣiffīn "You have destroyed a whole
generation of people" (وأرديت جيل ً ا من الناس )p. 594 2.33 To Qutham,
governor of Mecca, a few months before ʿAlī's death, warn- ing of
Muʿāwiyah's agents fomenting dissent during the hajj "My agent in the
west has written to inform me that a group of Syrians ... are being sent
to Mecca this hajj season" (فإنّ عيني بالمغرب كتب إليّ يعلمني أنّه وُجّه على
الموسم أُناس ٌ من أهل الشام )p. 596 2.34 To Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr,
governor of Egypt, extolling Ashtar and explaining ʿAlī's reasons for
sending him to take over "I have learned that you are distressed at my
sending Ashtar to take charge of your region" (وقد بلغني مَوْجِدتك من تسريح
الأشتر إلى عملك )p. 596 2.35 To ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, praising
Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, who had been killed in Egypt, and describing
ʿAlī's unsuccessful efforts to send aid "Egypt has been conquered, and
Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr---may God have mercy on him!---has gained
martyrdom" (ُ تسٱ دق هللا همحر ركب يبأ نب دّمحمو تحتُ تْفٱ دق رصم ّنإف شهد
)p. 598 2.36 To ʿAqīl in Medina, describing Ḥujr's fight against Ḍaḥḥāk,
who had raided Iraq, condemning the Quraysh and declaring ʿAlī's resolve
to continue fighting in the path of truth "I dispatched a large army of
Muslims to fight him" (فسرّحت إليه جيشًا كثيفًا من المسلمين )p. 598 2.37 To
Muʿāwiyah, before the Battle of Ṣiffīn, accusing him of using ʿUth-
mān's killing for his own benefit, and of abandoning him earlier, when
asked to aid him "Great God! How fervently you cling to your outlandish
passions" (فسبحان الله ما أشدّ لزومك للأهواء المبتدِعة )p. 600 2.38 To the
people of Egypt, when appointing Ashtar as governor "... I have sent you
one of God's own servants, who neither sleeps during the days of danger"
(فقد بعثت ُ إليكم عبدًا من عباد الله لا ينام أيّام الخوف )...p. 602
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 85
2.39 Warning to ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣbefore marching on Ṣiffīn "You have
subordinated your faith to the worldly gain promised to you by a man
whose deceit is plain" (هُ ّيَغ ٍرهاظ ٍئرمٱ ايندل اًعَبَت كنيد تلعج كّنإف
)p. 602 2.40 To a governor, possibly ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, who had
misappropri- ated funds "I am informed that you have done something,
which, if you have done it, means you have angered your Lord" (فقد بلغني
عنك أمر إن كنت فعلته فقد أسخطت ربّك )p. 604 2.41 Sent shortly before
ʿAlī's death, possibly to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās in Mecca, rebuking him
for misappropriation of funds "I had shared my charge with you" (فإن ّ ي
كنت أشركتك في أمانتي )p. 604 2.42 To ʿUmar ibn Abī Salamah, governor of
Bahrain, recalling him to par- ticipate in the march on Syria, and
replacing him with al-Nuʿmān ibn ʿAjlān "I have appointed al-Nuʿmān ibn
ʿAjlān over Bahrain" (فإن ّ نيرحبلا ىلع نالجع نب نامعنلا تيّ لو دق ي
)p. 606 2.43 To Maṣqalah, governor of Ardashīr, rebuking him for
misappropriation of treasury funds "I am informed that you have done
something, which, if you have done it, means that you have angered your
Lord" (بلغني عنك أمر إن كنت فعلته فقد أسخطت إلٰهك )p. 608 2.44 To Ziyād,
warning against Muʿāwiyah's blandishments "I have learned that Muʿāwiyah
wrote to you in an attempt to befuddle your mind and dull your blade" (َ
ب ْرَغ ّلِفتسيو كّبُ ل ّلزتسي كيلإ بتكةيواعم ّنأ تفرع دقو ك )p. 608 2.45 To
Ibn Ḥunayf, governor of Basra, rebuking him for favoring the wealthy,
Fadak, which was taken from his family, his own renunciant ways and
compassionate governance, censure of the world, pious counsel "Ibn
Ḥunayf, I am informed that one of Basra's grandees invited you to a
feast and you rushed to go" (فقد بلغني أنّ رجل ً ا من فِتْية أهل البصرة
دعاك إلى مأدُبة فأسرعت إليها )p. 610 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 86
detailed contents 2.46 To Ashtar, governor of Naṣībīn, recalling him
after the arbitration, sending him to Egypt "You are one of those whose
support I rely on to establish our religion" (فإنّك ممّن أستظهر به على
إقامة الدين )p. 616 2.47 Testament of counsel for Ḥasan and Ḥusayn after
the death blow, and for ʿAlī's family, urging restraint in blood
retaliation "I counsel you both to remain conscious of God. Do not seek
this world even if it seeks you" (أوصيكما بتقوى الله وأن لا تبغيا الدنيا
وإن بغتكما )p. 616 2.48 To Muʿāwiyah at Ṣiffīn, reluctantly accepting
arbitration, warning him against treachery, and underscoring ʿAlī's
submission to the ruling of the Qurʾan "Treachery and lies kill a man's
faith and ruin his worldly affairs" (ِ توُ ي روزلاو يغبلا ّنإو غانِ بالمرء
في دينه ودنياه )p. 618 2.49 Warning to ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, sent from
Nukhaylah, just before the march on Syria "This world distracts you from
the next" (فإنّ الدنيا مَشْغَلة عن غيرها )p. 620 2.50 To his commanders,
declaring his principled policies and offering pious counsel "It befits
those in authority" (يلاولا ىلع ا ً ّقح ّنإف )p. 620 2.51 To tax
collectors, instructing justice and compassion, and warning against
unfair seizure of property from subjects, whether Muslim, Christian, or
Jew "Whoever fails to care about his end, fails to safeguard himself by
advancing provisions for his soul" (فإنّ من لم يحذر ما هو صائر إليه لم
يقدّم لنفسه ما يُحرزها )p. 620 2.52 To governors on timings of the ritual
prayers "Pray the noon prayer when the sun casts a shadow equal to a
squatting goat" (فصلّوا بالناس الظهر حين ت َ فِيء الشمس مثل مَرْ ب ِ ض العَنْز
)p. 622 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 87
2.53 The Testament of Ashtar (ʿAhd al-Ashtar) on his appointment as
gover- nor of Egypt, lengthy instructions on fair, kind, and astute
governance, pious counsel "This is what God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander
of the Faithful, commands Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar, in the epistle
he writes appointing him governor of Egypt" (هذا ما أمر به عبد الله عليّ
أمير المؤمنين مالك بن الحارث الأشتر في عهده إليه حين ولّاه مصر ) p. 624
2.54 To Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, preceding the Battle of the Camel, urging
them to return to the fold "Although you deny this now, you know that I
did not approach the people" (فقد علمتما وإن كَت َ مْتما أن ّ ي لم أُرِد
الناس )p. 646 2.55 To Muʿāwiyah in the lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn,
urging him to return to the path of truth "God created this world for
the hereafter" (فإنّ الله سبحانه جعل الدنيا لما بعدها )p. 648 2.56 To
Shurayḥ, when appointing him commander of the vanguard to Syria, pious
counsel "Be conscious of God every morning and every night" (اتّق الله في
كلّ صباح ومساء )p. 650 2.57 Sent from Dhū Qār to the people of Kufa,
urging them to join ʿAlī in fighting the associates of the Camel at
Basra "I have marched from my hometown as either oppressor or oppressed"
(فإن ّ اًمولظم اّمإو اً ملاظ اّمإ اذه يِّيَح نع تجرخ ي )p. 650 2.58 To the
garrison towns, describing the Battle of Ṣiffīn "Events began thus: We
and the Syrians faced off" (وكان بدء أمرنا أنّا ٱلتقينا والقوم من أهل
الشام )p. 650 2.59 To Aswad ibn Quṭbah, commander of Ḥulwān, pious
counsel "A ruler's passions, if they lean in one direction" (فإنّ الوالي
إذا ٱختلف هواه )p. 652 2.60 To administrators through whose lands ʿAlī's
army was marching "I have dispatched troops who, God willing, will pass
through your lands" (فإن ّ ي قد سيّرت جنودًا هي مارّة بكم إن شاء الله
)p. 652 2.61 To Kumayl, governor of Hīt, rebuking him for failing to
defend against Sufyān ibn ʿAwf's attack "A man's neglect of what he has
been charged with" (فإنّ تضييع المرء ما وُل ّ ي )p. 654 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 88 detailed contents
2.62 To the people of Egypt, sent with the newly appointed governor
Ashtar, on events after the Prophet's death, ʿAlī's righteousness, the
Umayyads, urging the Egyptians to fight for the truth "God sent Muḥammad
as warner for the world" (فإنّ الله سبحانه بعث محمّدًا نذيرًا للعالمين
)p. 654 2.63 To Abū Mūsā, governor of Kufa, when he urged the people not
to sup- port ʿAlī in the Battle of the Camel, rebuking and dismissing
him from his post "I am told that you have spoken words that go both for
you and against you" (فقد بلغني عنك قول هو لك وعليك )p. 658 2.64 To
Muʿāwiyah, presumably in the lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn, who had
written accusations and demands "Yes, my clan and yours were on terms of
affection and unity, as you say" (ذ ام ىلع متنأو نحن اّ نك اّنإف كرت من
الأُلفة والجماعة )p. 658 2.65 After the Battle of Nahrawān, to Muʿāwiyah,
who had demanded that ʿAlī appoint him successor "This is the time for
you to understand fully the affairs swiftly unfolding before your eyes"
(رومألا نايع نم رصابلا حْمَ ّللاب عفتنت نأ كل نآ دقف )p. 662 2.66 To
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, likely sent from Kufa to Mecca, shortly before
ʿAlī's death "A man is overjoyed by gaining a thing he was not going to
lose" (َ يَ ل دبعلا ّنإف فْر َ َ يِ ل نكي مل يذلا ءيشلاب ح فُوته )p. 664 2.67
To Qutham, governor of Mecca, on leading the hajj, teaching the pil-
grims, and disbursing charity "Lead the hajj among the people and remind
them to revere these, God's special days" (فأقم للناس الحجّ وذَ كِّرْهم بأيّام
الله )p. 664 2.68 To Salmān, before ʿAlī's caliphate, pious counsel
"This world is like a snake" (فإنّ مَث َ ل الدنيا مَث َ ةَ ّيـَ حلا ل )p. 664
2.69 To Ḥārith, pious counsel "Hold fast to the Qurʾan and embrace its
counsel" (وتمسّك بحبل القرآن وٱنتصحه )p. 666 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed
contents 89 2.70 To Sahl, governor of Medina, telling him not to grieve
over defectors "I have learned that men from your town are stealing out
to join Muʿāwiyah" (َ لَ بَ ق نّمم اًلاجر ّنأ ينغلب دقف ك يتسلّلون إلى معاوية
)p. 668 2.71 To Mundhir, governor of Iṣṭakhr, chastising him for
misappropriation of treasury funds "I was deceived about you by your
father's piety" (كنم ين َ ّرَغ كيبأ حالص ّنإف )p. 668 2.72 To ʿAbdallāh
ibn al-ʿAbbās in Mecca, containing pious counsel "You will not exceed
your lifespan or be granted sustenance that is not yours" (فإنّك لست
بسابق أجلك ولا مرزوق ما ليس لك )p. 670 2.73 To Muʿāwiyah, possibly after
the arbitration, rejecting his demands to make him successor "I
attribute to weak judgment ... the fact that I exchanged letters with
you" (فإن ّ ُ مَ ل ... كباوج يف دّدرتلا ىلع ي وَهِّنٌ رأيي )p. 670 2.74 Treaty
between the tribes of Yemen and Rabīʿah "This is what the people of
Yemen ... have agreed upon" (هذا ما ٱجتمع عليه أهل اليمن )p. 672 2.75
From Medina early in ʿAlī's caliphate to Muʿāwiyah, explaining recent
events and instructing him to take the pledge of the caliphate for ʿAlī
in Syria "... You know that I was justified both in my efforts for your
clan and in turning away from them" (فقد علمت إعذاري فيكم وإعراضي عنكم
)...p. 672 2.76 To ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, while appointing him
governor of Basra after the Battle of the Camel "Be generous with your
attention" (سَع الناس بوجهك )p. 674 2.77 To ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, sent
to debate the Kharijites "Don't argue with them on the basis of the
Qurʾan" (لا تخاصمهم بالقرآن )p. 674 2.78 To Abū Mūsā in the lead-up to
the arbitration "The state of the people is such that many have bartered
away most of their allotted share" (فإنّ الناس قد تغيّر كثير منهم عن كثير
مِن حَظِّهم )p. 674 Additional Letter p. 676 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 90
detailed contents Section 3: Sayings: Chapter containing selections from
the Commander of the Faithful's wise sayings and words of counsel,
including selections from his answers to questions and short texts from
all genres of his literary production \[Includes aphorisms and short
texts not listed here, and the following longer pieces\]: 3.1 First
aphorism in Sayings chapter "In times of sedition, be like a young camel
buck" (ُ بَ ّللا نبٱكةنتفلا يف نك ون )p. 678 3.26 Four pillars of faith,
four pillars of unbelief, four branches of doubt "Faith stands on four
pillars: forbearance, conviction, justice, and struggle against evil"
(الإيمان على أربع دعائم على الصبر واليقين والعدل والجهاد )p. 684 3.33
Warning to Ḥasan about whom not to befriend "My dear son, remember four
things from me" (َ نُ ب اي اًعبرأ يّنع ظفحٱ َ ّي )p. 688 3.69 Addressing
this world, Ḍirār's report "World, O world, get away from me!" (يا دنيا
يا دنيا إليك عنّي )p. 696 3.70 Destiny and the march on Syria "Woe!
Perhaps you think destiny is final" (وَي ْ ح َ ك لعلّك ظننت قضاء لازمًا
)p. 696 3.73 Five traits of character "I counsel you to five traits so
precious it is only right that you should whip your camels to reach
them" (أوصيكم بخمس لو ضربتم إليها آباط الإبل لكانت لذلك أهل ً ا )p. 698
3.95 To Nawf al-Bikālī, pious counsel, David and Jesus as exemplars
"Nawf, blessed are those who reject worldliness" (يا نوف طُوب ٰ ى
للزاهدين في الدنيا )p. 704 3.99 Vagaries of the heart "There is a piece
of flesh attached to the jugular vein" (ِّلُ ع دقل َ ب ناسنإلا اذه طاَ يِنب ق
ض ْ عَةٌ )p. 706 3.110 Clans of Quraysh, Hāshim "Makhzūm are the sweet
blossoms of Quraysh" (أمّا بنو مخزوم فريحانة قريش )p. 710 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 91
3.112 When a man laughed while following a funeral procession "We behave
as though death were decreed for everyone other than our- selves" (بِتُك
انريغ ىلع اهيف توملا َ ّنَأَك )p. 712 3.119 Address to residents of graves
"O people of desolate abodes" (يا أهل الديار الموحشة )p. 714 3.120 To a
man who criticized this world "You who reproach this world---do you
choose to be deceived by her yet censure her?" (أيّها الذامّ للدنيا أتغترّ
بالدنيا ثمّتذمّها )p. 714 3.124 The Qurʾan's promise "Whoever is granted
four gifts will not be refused four others" (من أُعْطِي أربعًا لم يُحْر َ م
أربعًا )p. 718 3.133 To Kumayl on the virtues of knowledge, vaunt of his
own knowledge, and the continuity of God's proof through one who upholds
it in all ages "Kumayl, these hearts are like vessels, and the best are
those that best receive and store" (يا كميل بن زياد إنّ هذه القلوب أَوعية
فخـيرها أوعاها )p. 720 3.136 Pious counsel in Kufa after the Battle of
Nahrawān "Do not be one of those who expect the hereafter without work"
(لا تكن ممّن يرجو الآخرة بغير العمل )p. 722 3.237 Reasons for the
Shariʿah laws "God has mandated belief to purify you from polytheism"
(فرض الله الإيمان تطهيرًا من الشرك )p. 746 3.245--253 Section on Rare
Words: A selection from ʿAlī's sayings that need lex- ical explanations
3.245 First aphorism in Rare Words Section "When that happens,
religion's queen bee will rest its abdomen on the ground" (فإذا كان ذلك
ضَرَب َ ي َ عْسوب ُ الدين بذَنَبه )p. 752 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 92
detailed contents 3.263 The Kaʿbah's ornaments "At the time when the
Qurʾan was revealed to the Prophet, there were four kinds of property"
(إنّ القرآن أُنزل على النبيّ والأموالُ أربعة )p. 764 3.275 The Prophet "In a
time now past, I had a brother whom I loved in God's name" (كان لي فيما
مضى أخٌ في الله )p. 768 3.277 Condolence to Ashʿath on the death of his
son "Ashʿath, it is fitting that you mourn your son" (يا أشعث إن تحزن
على ٱبنك )p. 770 3.319 A believer "A believer shows his joy in his face
and hides his sorrow in his heart" (المؤمن بِش ْ رُه في وجهه وحزنه في قلبه
)p. 782 3.327 Pious counsel "Words are remembered, intentions are
tested, and «every soul is mortgaged to what it has earned.»" (َ ن ُ ّلُكو
ةَ ّوُ لْبَم رئارسلاو ةظوفحم ليواقألا َ بَسَك اَ مِب ٍسْف ت ْ رَهِين َ ةٌ )p. 784
3.350 Pious counsel "People! The stuff of this world is like rotten
grass" (يا أيّها الناس مَتاع الدنيا حُطام مُوبئ )p. 790 3.353 Counsel to
Jābir "The world is sustained by four types of people" (قِوام الدنيا
بأربعة )p. 794 3.358 On sustenance being decreed and the need for
contentment "Sustenance is of two types" (الرزق رزقان )p. 796 3.367 How
to apportion time "The believer divides his time into three parts"
(للمؤمن ثلاث ساعات )p. 800 3.387 Spending wealth for good "My dear son,
do not leave your wealth for others to inherit" (َ نُ ب اي ِّلَ خُت ال َ ّي
ايندلا نم اً ئيش كءارو َ ّنَف )p. 804 3.388 How to seek God's forgiveness
"May your mother be bereaved! Do you know what it means to beg God's
for- giveness?" (ث َ رافغتسالا ام يردتأ ك ُ ّمُأ َكْتَ لِك )p. 806 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 detailed contents 93
3.403 God's special devotees "God's special devotees are those who
perceive the world's reality" (إنّ أولياء الله هم الذين نظروا إلى باطن
الدنيا )p. 810 3.429 Last aphorism in Sayings chapter "Many are seduced
by praise" (رُب هيف لوقلا نسحب نوتفَم َ ّ )p. 816 Additional Sayings
p. 818 Raḍī's Conclusion p. 824 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Text and
Translation ∵ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 ∵ Nahj
al-Balāghah The Wisdom and Eloquence of ʿAlī Compiled by al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 ~~\\0~~~L}}:;.§~\~\~\~
\~""' .,,,, .} ,.,, ,,., '5' ;c;. ~`\J`{=tex}.~\~)   \_j, \_jJt ,,., ..
,,,, ".,,, ....... بسم الله الرحمٰن الرحيم 0.1ً ليسوو هئالب نم اًذاعمو
هئامعنل اً نمث دمحلا لعج يذلا هللا دمح دعب اّمأ ا إلى جنانه ةّمألا جارسو
ةّمئألا مامإو ةمحرلا ّيبن هلوسر ىلع ةالصلاو .هناسحإ ةدايزل اً ببسو
المنتخب١ من طينة الـكرم وسلالة المجد الأقدم ومغرس الفخار المعرق وفرع
العلاء المثمر المورق. وعلى أهل بيته مصابيح الظلم وعصم الأمم ومنار الدين
الواضحة ومثاقيل الفضل الراجحة. صل ّ ى الله عليهم أجمعين صلاة تكون إزاء
لفضلهم ومكافاة لعملهم وكفاء لطيب فرعهم وأصلهم ما أنار فجر ساطع وخوى نجم
طالع. 0.2فإن ّ ي كنت في عنفوان السنّ وغضاضة الغصن ٱبتدأت بتأليف كتاب في
خصائص الأئمة عليهم السلام يشتمل على محاسن أخبارهم وجواهر كلامهم حداني
عليه غرض ذ يتّ لا صئاصخلا نم تغرفو .مالكلا مامأ هتلعجو باتكلا ردص يف هترك
تخص ّ ماّيألا تازجاحم باتكلا ةّيقب مامتإ نع تقاعو مالسلا هيلع اً ّيلع
نينمؤملا ريمأ ومماطلات الزمان. وكنت قد بوّبت ما خرج من ذلك أبوابًا وفص ّ
لته فصولًا فجاء في آخرها فصل يتضمّن محاسن ما نقل عنه عليه السلام من الكلام
القصير في المواعظ والحكم والأمثال والأدب دون الخطب الطويلة والـكتب
المبسوطة. 0.3فٱستحسن جماعة من الأصدقاء ما ٱشتمل عليه الفصل المقدّم ذ كره
معجبين ببدائعه ومتعجّبين من نواصعه وسألوني عند ذلك أن أبدأ بتأليف كتاب
يحتوي على مختار كلام أمير المؤمنين٢ عليه السلام في جميع فنونه ومتشعّبات
غصونه من خطب ةحاصفلا بئارغو ةغالبلا بئاجع نم نّمضتي كلذ ّنأ اً ملع بدأو
ظعاومو بتكو وجواهر العربيّة وثواقب الكلم الدينيّة والدنيويّة ما لا يوجد
مجتمعًا في كلام ولا مجموع ١ز،س،چ،ك،آ:كذا.ل،ت: ⟩المنتجب⟨.ي:معًا.
٢تبدأمخطوطةھمنهنا. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera Qutbuddin,
2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_005a This is an open access chapter
distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. Raḍī's
Introduction In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 0.1 I
praise God, who made praise the return for his favors, the refuge from
his trials, the way to his garden, and the means to obtain yet more of
his benef- icence. May God shower blessings on his Messenger---the
Prophet of mercy, the Imam of all Imams, lantern for the community, the
one fashioned from the clay of honor, the scion of ancient nobility, the
deep-rooted tree of glory, and the leafy, fruit-bearing bough of
grandeur. May God shower blessings on the people of his house. They are
lamps in the darkness, protectors of the nations, brilliant beacons of
faith, and weighted scales of virtue. May God shower them with blessings
that equal their virtue, requite their endeavors, and match the bouquet
of their fragrant bough and root, for as long as the morning gleams
bright and the stars rise and set. 0.2 In the days of my eager youth,
motivated by a goal that I described in its introduction,1 I began
compiling a book about the qualities of the Imams that included their
beautiful sayings and bejeweled maxims. I finished transcribing the
qualities of the Commander of the Faithful, ʿAlī, but fate put
obstructions in my path and destiny cast delays, such that I was
prevented from finishing the rest. I had divided the part I had already
written into chapters and sections,
and,atitsend,IhadplacedasectiononshortsayingsnarratedfromʿAlī,includ-
ing words of counsel, aphorisms, maxims, and directions for refined
behavior; I had excluded the longer orations and more expansive
letters.2 0.3 A group of my friends were especially enthralled with this
section. Aston- ished by the marvels of the Commander of the Faithful's
words and amazed by their limpid clarity, they asked me to compile a
book that would offer a selection in all its manifold categories and
branches, including orations, letters, statements of counsel, and
directions for refined behavior. They knew full well that these pieces
offered wonderful eloquence and rare expressions, jewels of Arabic, and
gems of earthly wisdom and spiritual sayings, which are assembled 1
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣal-aʾimmah, 36--38. As noted in the present volume's
Introduction, Raḍī's pur- pose in writing it was to refute an Abbasid
(presumably Sunni) detractor. 2 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣal-aʾimmah, passim. The
section on ʿAlī includes details of his appointment
(naṣṣ)bytheProphet,someof
hiscelebratedmiracles,poetryinhispraiseandpoetrydescrib-
inghisappointmentatGhadīrKhumm,theeventsof
hiscaliphate,thegraceenjoyedbythose who visit his shrine, and a
selection from his sayings and sermons. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 100 Text
and Translation الأطراف في كتاب. إذ كان مولانا أميرالمؤمنين عليه السلام
مشرع الفصاحة وموردها
ومنشأالبلاغةومولدهاومنهعليهالسلامظهرمكنونهاوعنهأخذتقوانينهاوعلىأمثلته
حذا كلّ قائل خطيب وبكلامه ٱستعان كلّ واعظ بليغ. ومع ذلك فقد سبق وقصّروا
وتقدّم وتأخّروا لأنّ كلامه عليه السلام الكلام الذي عليه مَسحة من العلم
الإلهيّ وفيه عَبقة من الكلام النبوي ّ . 0.4ذلا روشنمو عفنلا ميظع نم هيف
امب اً ملاع كلذب ءادتبالا ىلإ مهتبجأف كر ومذخور الأجر. وٱعتمدت به أن أبي
ّ ن عن عظيم قدر أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام في هذه الفضيلة مضافة إلى
المحاسن الدثرة والفضائل الجم ّ ة وأنّه عليه السلام ٱنفرد ببلوغ غايتها من
جميع السلف الأوّلين الذين إنّما يؤثر عنهم منها القليل النادر والشاذّ الشارد
فأمّا كلامه عليه السلام فهو البحر الذي لا يساجل والجمّ الذي لا يحافل.
وأردت أن يسوغ لي التمثّل في الإفتخار به صل ّ ى الله عليه بقول الفرزدق
رحمة الله عليه١ ـِنْئِجَف يِئاَبآ َكِئٰ لوُأ ِ لْثِ مِب يـ هِـ ـمْ َ مَج اَذ ِإ
ـِماَجَمْلاُرْيِرَج اَي اَ نْتَع ـعٗ 0.5ورأيتكلامهصل ّ
ىاللهعليهيدورعلىأقطابثلاثةأوّلهاالخطبوالأوامروثانيها الـكتب والرسائل
وثالثها الحكم والمواعظ. فأجمعت بتوفيق الله على الابتداء بٱختيار
محاسنالخطبثممحاسنالـكتبثممحاسنالحكموالأدبمفردًالكلّ صنفمنذلك بابًا ومفضّل ً
ً لجاع يّنع ّذشي هاسع ام كاردتسٱل ةمّدقم نوكتل اً قاروأ هيف ا ا ويقع إليّ
آجل ً ا.وإذاجاءشيءمنكلامهعليهالسلامالخارجفيأثناءحوارأوجوابسؤالأو غرض آخر
من الأغراض في غير الأنحاء التي ذ كرتها وقرّرت القاعدة عليها نسبته إلى
أليق الأبواب به وأشدّها ملاحمة٢ لغرضه. وربّما جاء فيما أختاره من ذلك فصول
غير متّسقة ومحاسن كلم غير منتظمة لأنّني أورد النكت واللمع ولا أقصد التتالي
والنسق. ١البحر:الطويل. ٢چ،آ،ت،ك،س،ونسخةفيي:كذا.ھ،ل،ق،وأصلي: ⟩ملامحة⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Raḍī's Introduction
101 nowhere else, neither in spoken words nor in written books. Indeed,
the Com- mander of the Faithful is the fountainhead of elocution and its
wellspring, the cradle of eloquence and its birthplace. It is from him
that its secrets became known, and its rules were learned. He is the
model for every articulate orator, his the words used by every
persuasive preacher. Moreover, he was the first, while they came
trailing, he forged ahead, while they lagged behind. His words were
anointed with divine knowledge and perfumed by prophetic discourse. 0.4
I answered my friends' appeal and began the book, knowing it would bring
me greatbenefit, redolentfame, andlastingreward.Mypurpose wastodemon-
strate the Commander of the Faithful's lofty station in this particular
virtue, in addition to his numerous other qualities and abundant merits,
and to highlight his singular attainment among the earliest Muslims. Of
their words, we find a few sporadic pieces and occasional lines, while
his are a bottomless ocean, an
overwhelmingtorrent.Withgreatprideinmyowndescentfromhim,Ibegyour leave
to cite here a testimonial verse by Farazdaq:1 These are my ancestors,
Jarīr, bring on yours! Who will be your boast in our gatherings? 0.5
ʿAlī's verbal heritage, I have found, revolves around three poles:
orations and directives; letters and epistles; and sayings and counsels.
I have, with God's guidance, selected and transcribed his most beautiful
orations, then his most beautiful letters, then his most beautiful
sayings and directions for refined behavior. For each of these
categories, I have dedicated its own separate chap- ter. In each
chapter, I have left several pages blank, in case I have missed some-
thing that I might discover later. Whenever I have come across material
from his oeuvre that was spoken in a conversation, or in answer to a
question, or that belongs to a genre different than the ones around
which I have structured my compilation, I have placed it in the chapter
to which it is most suited, the one closest to it in form. Some sections
therefore may not be fully harmonious in their coordination and some
sayings may not be systematically arranged. My goal is to transcribe
pithy sayings and dazzling expressions; consistent and methodical
recording is not my intention. 1 Farazdaq,
Dīwān,360,fromapoembeginning(منّاالذيٱختيرالرجالسماحة
.)Farazdaq(d.ca.110/728) was a famous Umayyad-era poet best, known for
his satirical exchanges (naqāʾiḍ) with another eminent poet, Jarīr (also
d. 110/728). Both were from the tribe of Tamīm, Farazdaq from the
sub-tribe of Mujāshiʿ of the Dārim clan, Jarīr from the clan of Kulayb
ibn Yarbūʿ. Farazdaq also composed praise poetry for the Umayyad
caliphs, as well as for the Shiʿi Imam, ʿAlī's grandson and namesake,
ʿAlī Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 102 Text and
Translation 0.6ومن عجائبه عليه السلام التي ٱنفرد بها وأمن المشار كة فيها
أنّ كلامه الوارد في الزهد والمواعظ والتذ كير والزواجر إذا تأمّله المتأمّل
وفكّر فيه المفكّر وخلع من قلبه أنّه
كلاممثلهممّنعظمقدرهونفذأمرهوأحاطبالرقابملـكهلميعترضهالشكّ فيأنّهمن كلام من
لا حظ ّ له في غير الزهادة ولا شغل له بغير العبادة قد قبع في كِسر بيت أو
ٱنقطعفيسفحجبللايسمعإلّاحسّهولايرىإلّانفسه.ولايكاديوقنبأنّهكلاممن طُقيف هفيس اً
تلصم برحلا يف سمغني ّ الرقاب ويجدّل الأبطال ويعود به ينطف دمًا ويقطر مُه َ
جًا وهو مع تلك الحال زاهد الزهّاد وبدل الأبدال١ وهذه من فضائله العجيبة
وخصائصه اللطيفة التي جمع بها بين الأضداد وأل ّ ف بين الأشتات وكثيرًا ما
أذاكر الإخوان بها وأستخرج عجبهم منها وهي موضع للعبرة بها والفكرة فيها.
0.7وربّما جاء في أثناء هذا الاختيار اللفظ المردّد والمعنى المكرّر والعذر في
ذلك أنّ ةياور يف راتخملا مالكلا قفّتٱ امّبرف اًديدش اً فالتخٱ فلتخت مالسلا
هيلع همالك تاياور
فنقلعلىوجههثمّوجدبعدذلكفيروايةأخرىموضوعًاغيروضعهالأوّلإمّابزيادة مختارة أو
لفظ أحسن عبارة فتقتضي الحال أن يعاد ٱستظهارًا للاختيار وغيرة على عقائل
الكلام وربّما بعد العهد أيضًا بما ٱختير أوّلًا فأعيد بعضه سهوًا ونسيانًا لا
قصدًا وٱعتمادًا.ولاأدّعيمعذلكأنّنيأحيطبأقطارجميعكلامهعليهالسلامحتّىلايشذّ عنّي
منه شاذّ ولا يندّ نادّ بل لا أبعّد أن يكون القاصر عنّي فوق الواقع إليّ والحاصل
في ربقتي دون الخارج من يدي ّ وما عليّإلّا بذل الجهد وبلاغ الوسع وعلى الله
سبحانه نهج السبيل ورشاد الدليل إن شاء الله تعالى. ١تبدأمخطوطةشمنهنا.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Raḍī's Introduction
103 0.6 Among the marvels unique to ʿAlī that no one else shares with
him is the following: if a person were to ponder his words of
renunciation, counsel, remembrance, or admonition, if he were to parse
them thoroughly---while putting aside the knowledge that they were
spoken by a man of lofty stature whose commands people followed and who
ruled over a multitude---he would have no doubt that these are the words
of one who knows nothing but renunci- ation, whose sole occupation is
worship, who has withdrawn to a lonely corner or leads a solitary life
at the foot of a mountain, hearing no other voice and seeing no other
person. He would never imagine that they could have been
spokenbyamanwhorushedintothefrayof battlebrandishinghissword,strik- ing
off men's heads and cutting down warriors, then returning with it
dripping blood and gore. Yet, ʿAlī was also the most pious of
renunciants and the great- est of God's deputies.1 This---his
combination of opposites and conjunction of contraries---is one of his
most marvelous virtues and sublime characteristics. I often remind my
companions of this quality and they are moved to wonder, for it offers
lessons and provokes contemplation. 0.7 In my selection of material, it
is possible that some words repeat and cer- tain themes recur; the
redundancy is occasioned by the strong variation in different narrations
of ʿAlī's words. It could be that I have transcribed a piece as I found
it in one narrative, then I came across it in another, somewhat
different from the first, either in having a choice supplement, or a
more eloquent turn of phrase, which led me to repeat it, to shore up my
compilation and preserve these wondrously wise novelties. Or it could be
that some time had gone by since my first selection and I repeated a
text, not deliberately and intention- ally, but in error or
forgetfulness. Even so, I do not claim that I have gathered all the
prominent pieces of ʿAlī's words such that no stray escaped my lasso and
no breakaway absconded. Indeed, it is likely that the pieces I have
missed are more numerous than the ones I found, and the examples I have
tracked down are fewer than the ones that slipped from my grasp. The
most I can do is to endeavor to the best of my ability. It is God---if
he wills---who shows the path and guides aright. 1 Lit. "of the
substitutes," (abdāl, sing. badal), refers to "certain righteous
persons, of whom the world is never destitute; when one dies, God
substitutes another in his place" (Lane, Lexicon, s.v. "B-D-L").
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 104 Text and
Translation 0.8ورأيت من بعدُ تسمية هذا الكتاب بنهج البلاغة إذ كان يفتح
للناظر فيه أبوابها ويقرّب عليه طِلابها وفيه حاجة العالم والمتعلّم وبغية
البليغ والزاهد ويمضي في أثنائه من عجيب الكلام في التوحيد والعدل وتنزيه
الله سبحانه عن شبه الخلق ما هو بلال كلّ غل ّ ة وشفاء كلّ عل ّ ة وجلاء كلّ
شبهة. 0.9ومن الله سبحانه أستمدّ التوفيق والعصمة وأتنجّز التسديد والمعونة
وأستعيذه من خطأ الجنان قبل خطأ اللسان ومن زل ّ ة الكلم قبل زل ّ ة القدم
وهو حسبي ونعم الوكيل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Raḍī's Introduction
105 0.8 I have decided to name this book Nahj al-Balāghah (The Way of
Elo- quence), for it opens doors of eloquence for its readers and helps
them acquire
itstools.Init,bothscholarandstudentcanfindsomethingthatspeakstothem, and
through it, both orator and renunciant can fulfill their desires. Within
its pages, you will see marvelous expositions on God's unity and
justice, on strip- ping God of attributes that would render him like his
creatures,1 and exposi- tions that assuage thirst, cure sickness, and
dispel doubt. 0.9 I ask God for guidance and protection. I appeal to him
for direction and aid. I ask him to protect my heart before my tongue
errs, and my tongue before my foot slips. God is my sufficiency and the
best guardian. 1 Raḍī's mention of "God's unity and justice" and his
words about "stripping God of attributes" speak to his Muʿtazilī
beliefs. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 باب المختار من خطب
أمير المؤمنين صل ّ ى الله عليه وأوامره ويدخل في ذلك المختار من كلامه
الجاري مجرى الخطب في المقامات المحضورة والمواقف المذ كورة والخطوب
الواردة 1.1فمن خطبة له عليه السلام يذ کر فيها ٱبتداء خلق السماوات والأرض
وخلق آدم عليه السلام 1.1.1الحمد لله الذي لا يبلغ مدحته القائلون ولا يحصي
نعمه١ العادّون ولا يؤدّي حقّه المجتهدون الذي لا يدر که بعد الهمم ولا يناله
غوص الفطن الذي ليس لصفته حدّ محدود ولا نعت موجود ولا وقت معدود ولا أجل
ممدود فطر الخلائق بقدرته ونشر الرياح برحمته ووتّد بالصخور مي َ دان أرضه.
أوّل الدين معرفته وکمال معرفته التصديق به وکمال التصديق به توحيده وکمال
توحيده الإخلاص له وکمال الإخلاص له نفي الصفات عنه لشهادةکلّ صفة أنّها غير
الموصوف وشهادةکلّ موصوف أنّه غير الصفة. فمن وصف الله سبحانه فقد قرنه ومن
قرنه فقد ثنّاه ومن ثنّاه فقد جزّأه ومن جزّأه فقد جهله ومن جهله فقد أشار إليه
ومن أشار إليه فقد حدّه ومن حدّه فقد عدّه ومن قال مدع نع ال دوجوم ثدح نع ال
نئاک .هنم یلخأ دقفَمالَ ع لاق نمو هنّمض دقفَ ميف مع کلّ شيء لا بمقارنة وغير
کلّ شيء لا بمزايلة فاعل لا بمعنی الحرکات والآلة بصير إذ لا منظور إليه من
خلقه متوحّد إذ لا سکن يستأنس به ولا يستوحش لفقده. ١ش:كذا.ھ،ونسخةفيش:
⟩نعماءه⟨.ي: ⟩بقاه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera Qutbuddin,
2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_005b This is an open access chapter
distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. 1 Orations
Chapter containing selections from the Commander of the Faithful's
orations and directives, including selections from his addresses that
may be likened to orations, spoken in charged gatherings, famous
battles, and times of danger 1.1 From an oration by ʿAlī, in which he
spoke of the creation of sky and earth, and the creation of Adam:1 1.1.1
I praise God. Yet no speaker can articulate his praise, no reckoner can
count his favors, and the most diligent cannot give him his due. Soaring
thoughts cannot reach him and deep minds cannot fathom him. He cannot be
described, for he is beyond the limits of demarcated boundaries,
existing depictions, tallied times, and protracted lifespans. His power
created the uni- verse and his mercy sent forth rain-bearing winds.
Then, to curb its oscillation,
hepeggedtheearthwithmassiverocks.Thefirstpartof religionisknowledgeof
God. Knowledge of him is perfected by belief in him. Belief in him is
perfected by the declaration of his oneness. Declaration of his oneness
is perfected by sincere allegiance to him. Sincere allegiance to him is
achieved by negating all attributes ascribed to him, by the testimony of
every attribute that it is separate from the thing described, and by the
testimony of each thing described that it is separate from the
attribute.2 To describe God is to ascribe associates to him. To ascribe
associates to him is to ascribe duality to him. To ascribe duality to
him is to divide him. To divide him is to undervalue him. To undervalue
him is to depict him. To depict him is to circumscribe him. To
circumscribe him is to quantify him.To ask, "In what?" is to confine
him.To ask, "On what?" is to make another space empty of him. God is a
being but not by coming into being. He is existent but not after
non-existence. He is with all things but not by associa- tion. He is
other than all things but not by detachment. He is an agent but not by
movement or instrument. He was all-seeing when there was no creature to
be seen. He existed in solitude when there was no friend in whose
familiarity he could take comfort, or by whose absence he would be
distraught. 1 The first section (§1.1.1) is from ʿAlī's oration to the
Kufans, urging them to regroup to fight Muʿāwiyah, after the Battle of
Nahrawān in 38/658. Kulaynī, Kāfī, 1:134. 2 I.e., the attribute and the
thing described are two separate things, they are part of a pair and
have "two-ness," and, as such, neither label can be applied to God, who
is one. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 108 Text and
Translation 1.1.2أنشأ الخلق إنشاء وٱبتدأه ٱبتداء بلا رويّة أجالها ولا
تجربة ٱستفادها ولا حر کة أحدثها ولا هَمامة نفس ٱضطرب فيها أحال الأشياء
لأوقاتها ولأم بين مختلفاتها وغرّز اهنئارقب اً فراع اهئاهتنٱو اهدودحب اًطيحم
اهئادتبٱ لبق اهب اً ملاع اهحابشأ اهمزلأو اهزئارغ وأحنائها. ثمّأنشأ سبحانه
فتق الأجواء وشقّ الأرجاء وسکائک الهواء فأجری فيها ماء اهرمأف ةفصاقلا
عزعزلاو ةفصاعلا حيرلا نتم یلع هلمح هراّخز اً مکارتم هراّيت اًمطالتم
بردّهوسلّطهاعلیشدّهوقرنهاإلیحدّهالهواءمنتحتهافتيقوالماءمنفوقهادفيقثمّأنشأ
قيفصتب اهرمأف اهاشنم دعبأو اهارجم فصعأو اهّبرم مادأو اهّبهم مقتعٱ اً حير
هناحبس الماء الزخّار وإثارة موج البحار فمخضته مخض السِّقاء وعصفت به عصفها
بالفضاء تردّ أوّله إلی آخره وساجيه الی مائره حتّی عب ّ عبابه ورمی بالزبد
رکامه فرفعه في هواء ّنهايلعو اً فوفکم اًجوم ّنهالفس لعج تاومس عبس هنم یّوسف
قهفنم ّوجو قتفنم
سقفًامحفوظًاوسمکًامرفوعًابغيرعمديدعمهاولادِسارينتظمهاثّمزيّنهابزينةالـکواکب
رئاس فقسو رئاد کـلف يف اًرينم اً رمقو اًريطتسم اًجارس اهيف یرجأو بقاوثلا
ءايضو ورقيم مائر. 1.1.3ثمّفتق ما بين السموات العلى فملأهنّ أطوارًا من
ملائکته منهم سجود لا يرکعون ورکوع لا ينتصبون وصافّون لا يتزايلون ومسبّحون
لا يسأمون لا يغشاهم نوم العيون ولا سهو العقول ولا فترة الأبدان ولا غفلة
النسيان ومنهم أمناء علی وحيه وألسنة الی
رسلهومختلفونبقضائهوأمرهومنهمالحفظةلعبادهوالسدنةلأبوابجنانهومنهمالثابتة
في الأرضين السفلی أقدامهم والمارقة من السماء العليا أعناقهم والخارجة من
الأقطار
أرکانهموالمناسبةلقوائمالعرشأکتافهمناکسةدونهأبصارهممتلفّعونتحتهبأجنحتهم
مضروبةبينهموبينمندونهمحجبالعزّةوأستارالقدرةلايتوهّمونربّهمبالتصويرولا يجرون
عليه صفات المصنوعين ولا يحدّونه بالأماکن ولا يشيرون إليه بالنظائر.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
109 1.1.2 God created the world and gave it a beginning. He did this
without long mulling, prior experience, generated movement, or stirring
aspiration. He made all things in their proper time and combined their
parts. He accorded them a particular nature and gave them a specific
form. He knew them before he gave them a beginning, cognizant of their
limits and consequences, and aware of their connections and
complexities. Then he rent the ether, tore up the sky and air, and
unleashed a torrent roiling with crashing waves. He placed the torrent
on the back of a stormy wind, a raging tempest. He ordered the wind to
hold the torrent in check, dispatched it to fetter the flood, and com-
pelled it to restrict the advancing surf. Below, the air was vast and
empty. The water gushed above. Then, he created a barren wind, its
control permanent, its current tempestuous, and its perfume wafting. He
commanded it to whip up the rolling waters and bring forth mighty waves.
The wind churned up the water like cream in a churning skin and tossed
it about in the sky, flipping it end over end and mixing the still and
the shifting, until it frothed and bubbled and threw up a mountain of
foam. Raising the frothy mixture in the expansive layers of air, in the
vast ether, God molded seven skies---the lowest of them a frozen wave,
and the loftiest a well-preserved canopy, an elevated firmament--- with
no pillar for support, and no nails or ropes to bind. Then he ornamented
the sky with beautiful stars and bright lights. He set therein a radiant
sun and a glowing moon, gliding in that spinning sphere, that moving
sky, that flowing, studded expanse. 1.1.3 Then God rent the lofty skies
and filled them with ranks of his angels: some continually prostrate,
never bowing, others bow, never standing straight, yet others stand in
rows, never quitting that position, and yet more chant lita- niesof
hispraise,nevertiring.Drowsyeyesdonotimpedethem,norwandering minds,
exhausted bodies, or forgetfulness occasioned by lack of heed. Among
them, too, are angels God has entrusted with his revelation.
Constituting God's tongues to his apostles, they come and go with his
decrees and commands. Some are charged with protecting his servants,
others are gatekeepers at the doors of his Garden. Yet others have feet
firmly fixed in the nethermost regions of the earth, while their necks
extend beyond the highest heaven, their flanks stretch beyond the land
mass, and their shoulders reach the posts of God's throne. They lower
their gaze before him and spread interlocked wings under- neath,
separated from those below by veils of might and cloaks of power. They
do not attempt to picture their Lord through imagination, or apply to
him the attributes of created beings, or demarcate him within a
location, or depict him with comparisons. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 110 Text
and Translation 1.1.4منها في صفة خلق آدم عليه السلام ثمّجمع سبحانه من حزن
الأرض وسهلها وعذبها وسبخها تربة سنّها بالماء حتّی خلصت ولاطها بالبل ّ ة
حتّی لزبت فجبل منها صورة ذات أحناء ووصول وأعضاء وفصول أجمدها حتّی ٱستمسکت
وأصلدها حتّی صلصلت لوقت معدود وأجل معلوم ثمّنفخ
فيهامنروحهفمثلتإنسانًاذاأذهانيجيلهاوفکريتصرّفبهاوجوارحيختدمهاوأدوات
يقلّبها١ ومعرفة يفرّق بها بين الحقّ والباطل٢ والأذواق والمشامّ والألوان
والأجناس معجونًا بطينة الأكوان٣ المختلفة والأشباه المؤتلفة والأضداد
المتعادية والأخلاط المتباينة من الحرّوالبرد والبل ّ ة والجمود والم َ ساءة
والسرور. 1.1.5وٱستأدی الله سبحانه الملائکة وديعته لديهم وعهد وصيّته إليهم
في الإذعان بالسجود له والخنوع لتکرمته فقال ﴿ٱس ْ ج ُ دُواْلِآدَمَف َ سْيِ لْب ِإ
ا َ ّل ِإ اْوُدَجَس َ ﴾وقبيله ٱعترتهم الحميّة وغلبت عليهم الشقوة وتعزّزوا
بخلقة النار وٱستوهنوا خلق الصلصال فأعطاه الله َ ل ِإ نيِرَظْنُ ملا َنِم َكَ ّن
ِإ﴿ لاقف ةدعلل اًزاجنإو ةّيلبلل اًمامتتسٱو ةطخسلل اً قاقحتسٱ ةرظنلا ىٰ تْقَوْلٱ
ِمْوَ ي هرّذحوهتّلحماهيفنمآوهشيعاهيفدغرأاًرادمدآهناحبسنکسأّمث.﴾ِموُ لْعَمْلٱ ِ
إبليس وعداوته فٱغترّه إبليس نفاسة عليه بدار المقام ومرافقة الأبرار فباع
اليقين بشکّه والعزيمة بوهنه وٱستبدل بالجذل وجل ً ا وبالاغترار ندمًا ثمّبسط
الله سبحانه له في توبته ولقّاهکلمة رحمته ووعده المردّ إلی جنّته فأهبطه إلی
دار البليّة وتناسل الذرّيّة. 1.1.6وٱصطفى سبحانه من ولده أنبياء أخذ علی
الوحي ميثاقهم وعلی تبليغ الرسالة مهتلاتجٱو هعم دادنألا اوذخّتٱو هّقح
اولهجف مهيلإ هللا دهع هقلخُرثکأ لّدب اّ مل مهتنامأ الشياطين عن معرفته
وٱقتطعتهم عن عبادته فبعث فيهم رسله وواتر إليهم أنبياءه ليستأدوهم ميثاق
فطرته ويذ کّروهم منسيّ نعمته ويحتجّوا عليهم بالتبليغ ويثيروا لهم
١ش،ھ:كذا.ي: ⟩يستعملها⟨. ٢ش،وأضيفتفيھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.ي،وأصلھ: سقطت ⟩الحقّ
والباطل⟨. ٣ش،مصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ي،وأصلھ: ⟩الألوان⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 111 1.1.4 From the same oration, describing the creation of
Adam: God gathered soil by sifting coarse earth and fine, sweet earth
and salty. He rinsed it with water until it became pure and clean, and
moistened and kneaded it until it was smooth and malleable. With this
mixture, he molded a
formwithcurves,joints,limbs,andnodes.Heletitdryuntilithardened,setting
it aside for a fixed period of time, until it became firm. Then he
breathed into it of his spirit, and it stood before him as a human
being. This being had faculties it could harness, a mind it could
engage, limbs it could yoke to its service, parts it could use as
instruments, and perception with which it could differentiate between
right and wrong, tastes and smells, colors, and species. Its clay was a
blend of disparate entities, assembled forms, warring opposites, and
dissimilar mixtures: hot and cold, wet and dry, painful and joyous.
1.1.5 Then God commanded his angels to fulfill the trust with which he
had charged them and discharge the covenant he had enjoined---to
prostrate hum- bly, deferentially, before Adam, in recognition of the
honor he had received from God. God said, «Prostrate before Adam, and
they all prostrated except Iblīs»1 and Iblīs's tribe. Pride held them
back and wretchedness took over when they boasted of their creation from
fire and scorned the creation of clay. God gave Iblīs a respite so that
he could earn yet more of God's wrath, to complete
thetrialandfulfillthepledge.Hesaid,«Youhavebeenplacedamongthosewho have
been grantedrespiteuntil the dayof destiny.»2 Asfor Adam,God gavehim a
home, with a good life therein and a safe dwelling. He warned him of
Iblīs and of Iblīs's enmity. Iblīs misled Adam, for he was jealous of
Adam's heavenly abode and pious companions. Adam was deceived---he
exchanged certainty for doubt and resolve for weakness, his bliss was
replaced by fear, his decep- tion was followed by regret. Afterward, God
accepted his plea for forgiveness, spoke words of mercy, and promised
him a return to paradise, but he never- theless cast Adam into the abode
of tribulation, where his descendants would multiply for generations.
1.1.6 FromAdam'sdescendants,Godselectedprophets,exactingapledgefrom
themtoconveyhisrevelation,andentrustingthemwithdeliveringhismessage. As
time passed, most people altered God's covenant, denied what they owed
him, and ascribed partners to him. The devils had driven them away from
their earlier recognition of him, stopping them from his worship
altogether. God dis- patched messengers and a succession of prophets to
restore people to their 1 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:34, Ṭāhā 20:116, Isrāʾ
17:61. Iblīs refers to Lucifer. 2 Qurʾan, Ḥijr 15:37--38, Ṣād 38:80--81.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 112 Text and
Translation عوضوم مهتحت داهمو عوفرم مهقوف فقس نم ةردقملا تايآ مهورُ يو
لوقعلا نئافد ومعايش تحييهم وآجال تفنيهم وأوصاب تُهرمهم وأحداث تتابع
عليهم. ولم يُخل الله سبحانهخلقهمننبيّ
مرسلأوکتابمنزلأوحجّةلازمةأومحجّةقائمة.رسللاتقصر بهم قل ّ ة عددهم ولا کثرة
المکذّبين لهم. من سابق سمّي له من بعده أو غابر عرّفه من قبله. علی ذلـک نسلت
القرون ومضت الدهور وسلفت الآباء وخلفت الأبناء. 1.1.7إلی أن بعث الله
سبحانه محمّدًا صل ّ ی الله عليه لإنجاز عدته وتمام نبوّته مأخوذًا ءاوهأو
ةقّرفتم للم ذئموي ضرألا لهأو هداليم اً ميرکهتامس ةروهشم هقاثيم نيّيبنلا یلع
منتشرة وطرائق متشتّتة بين مشبّه لله بخلقه أو ملحد في ٱسمه أو مشير إلی غيره
فهداهم به من الضلالة وأنقذهم به١ من الجهالة. ثمّٱختار الله سبحانه لمحمّد
صل ّ ی الله عليه وآله لقاءه ورضي له ما عنده وأکرمه عن دار الدنيا ورغب به
عن مقام البلوی فقبضه إليه ّ لص اً ميرک ً لَ مَه مهوکرتي مل ذإ اهممأل
ءايبنألا تفّلخ ام مکيف فّلخو هلآ ىلعو هيلع هللا ی ا هخسانو هضئارفو هلئاضفو
همارحو هلالح اً نّيبم مکّبر باتك مئاق مَلَ ع الو حضاو قيرط ريغب ومنسوخه ورخصه
وعزائمه وخاصّه وعامّه وعبره وأمثاله ومرسله ومحدوده ومحکمه
هلهجيفدابعلایلععّسوموهملعقاثيمذوخأمنيبهضماوغاً نّيبمهلمجاًرّسفمههباشتمو وبين
مثبت في الکتاب فرضه معلوم في السنّة نسخه وواجب في السنّة أخذه مرخّص
فيالکتابتر کهوبينواجببوقتهوزائلفيمستقبلهومباينبينمحارمهمنکبيرأوعد عليه
نيرانه أو صغير أرصد له غفرانه وبين مقبول في أدناه وموسّع في أقصاه.
١م:كذا.ي:⟩بمكانه⟨.ش:سقطتمنالمتن⟩هداهم...الجهالة⟨.ھ:هذهالعبارةمعبضعةأسطر
أخرىمحيت. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
113 original pledge. He directed his prophets to remind people of the
divine favors they had forgotten, establish the truth by conveying his
message, and revive their numbed intellects. He instructed his prophets
to show people the signs of his power: the sky raised above, and the
earth spread below, livelihoods that sustained life, and lifespans that
ended in death, suffering that made people age, and relentless
calamities. Never in all this time did God allow his creation to be left
without a prophet, a revealed scripture, a sure proof, or a clear path.
The scanty number who answered did not stop God's messengers, nor the
mul- titudes of their repudiators. Each messenger had his successor
named for him, each successor was identified by his predecessor. In this
manner, generations went by, and ages passed. Fathers died, and sons
took their place. 1.1.7 So it was, until God sent Muḥammad to fulfill
his promise and complete the line of prophecy. All earlier prophets had
been made to affirm Muḥammad, whose qualities had been made known to
them, with a binding oath. His birth, when it came, brought auspicious
blessings. At that time, the earth's inhabi- tants were divided into
numerous faiths with different notions and divergent views. One group
likened God to his creatures, another rejected his name, and a third
looked to a separate deity. Through Muḥammad, God saved the peo- ple
from their errant ways. Because of his eminence, he delivered them from
ignorance. Then God summoned Muḥammad to meet with him and desired for
him the blessings to be enjoyed at his side. Raising him from the
vileness of this worldly abode and lifting him from this place of
tribulation, God brought him into his presence, honored and esteemed.
For you, he left you what earlier prophets left their communities, they
did not abandon their followers without guidance, without a clear path
or a signpost. Muḥammad, too, left you your Lord's Book, and he fully
elucidated its contents: the licit versus the illicit, rec- ommended
virtues versus required mandates, abrogating verses versus abro- gated
ones, licenses versus decrees, specifics versus generalities, lessons
versus parables, free verses versus restricted ones, and clear verses
versus ambiguous
ones.HeexplainedtheBook'ssubtletiesandclarifiedwhatwasobscure,includ-
ing things whose knowledge is required for all God's servants, versus
others, ignoranceof
whichisexcused;thingswhosemandateisestablishedintheBook while their
abrogation is shown in the Sunnah, versus others whose practice is
commanded in the Sunnah while vacating them is permitted in the Book;
and things that were compulsory in their time, versus others whose
directive subse- quently ceased. He differentiated among the Book's
prohibitions of grave sins which incur the punishment of the Fire,
versus smaller transgressions which hold the prospect of God's
forgiveness; of acts acceptable in minimal form, ver- sus those that
earn maximum reward. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 114 Text and
Translation 1.1.8منها وفرض عليکم حجّ بيته الذي جعله قبلة للأنام يردونه
ورود الأنعام ويألهون إليه ولوه الحمام جعله سبحانه علامة لتواضعهم لعظمته
وإذعانهم لعزّته وٱختار من خلقه سُمّاعًا أجابوا إليه دعوته وصدّقوا کلمته
ووقفوا مواقف أنبيائه وتشبّهوا بملائکته المطيفين بعرشه يحرزون الأرباح في
متجر عبادته ويتبادرون عنده موعد مغفرته. جعله سبحانه لاقف هتدافو مکيلع
بتکو هّقح بجوأو هّجح ضرف اًمرح نيذئاعللو اً ملع مالسإلل َ لَ عِهّٰلِ لَو﴿ هناحبس ح
ِساَ ّنلٱ ى تْيَ بْلٱ ُ ّج ِ ِ مَنِ ٱسْت َ ً ليِبَسِهْيَ ل ِإَعاَط ِنَعٌّيِنَغَ هللٱ َ ّنِإَ فَ
رَفَك ْنَمَو ا .﴾َنيِ مَ لَٰعْلٱ 1.2ومن خطبة له عليه السلام بعد ٱنصرافه من صفّين
1.2.1أحمده ٱستتمامًا لنعمته وٱستسلامًا لعزّته وٱستعصامًا من معصيته وأستعينه
فاقة إلی کفايته إنّه لا يضلّ من هداه ولا يئل من عاداه ولا يفتقر من کفاه
فإنّه أرجح ما وُزنوأفضلماخُزن.وأشهدأنلاإل ٰ اهصاصُماًدقتعماهصالخإاً
نَحتممةداهش١هللااّلإه
نتمسّکبهاأبدًاماأبقاناوندّخرهالأهاويلمايلقانافإنّهاعزيمةالإيمانوفاتحةالإحسان
ومرضاةالرحمانومَدحرةالشيطان.وأشهدأنّ محمّدًاعبدهورسولهأرسلهبالدينالمشهور
والعلم المأثور والکتاب المسطور والنور الساطع والضياء اللامع والأمر
الصادع إزاحة مذجنٱ نتف يف سانلاو .تالُ ثَ ملل اًفيوختو تايآلاب اًريذحتو
تانّيبلاب اًجاجتحٱو تاهبشلل ١ش،ي:كذا.ھ:أضيفت ⟩وحدهلاشريكله⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
115 1.1.8 From the same oration: God mandated the rite of pilgrimage to
his House, which he commanded you to face in prayer. He directed you to
race to the House like cattle to water, like doves to seed,
demonstrating your prostration before his greatness and your submission
to his power. He selected true listeners to answer his call, believe in
his word, stand in the stations of the prophets, and follow the example
of angels who circumambulate his throne. These pilgrims obtain abundant
profit through their worship of him, and they speedily secure his
forgiveness. God characterized his House as Islam's lofty banner and
made it a sanctuary for all who seek shelter. Mandating pilgrimage to
it, he com- manded you to submit its due and come to it, and he decreed,
«Pilgrimage to the House is compulsory for all who are able to find a
path. As for those who disbelieve, they should know that God has need of
no one from all the worlds.»1 1.2 From an oration given by ʿAlī during
his return from Ṣiffīn:2 1.2.1 I praise God, seeking the completion of
his favor, submitting to his might, and entreating his protection
against sin. I beseech him, needing only his all-sufficing aid.
Whomsoever God guides never goes astray, whomsoever he abhors never
endures, and whomsoever he suffices never wants. His praise is the
weightiest commodity placed on the celestial scales, and the best
treasure one can hoard. I testify that there is no god but God---I
render this testimony with firm sincerity and true belief. We, all of
us, shall cling to it for as long as God gives us life, relying on it to
dispel the terrors we must face, for it is the requirement of our faith
and the key to God's gifts, it pleases the Merciful and banishes Satan.
I testify that Muḥammad is God's servant and messenger and acknowledge
that God sent Muḥammad with a celebrated religion, a legacy of
knowledge,3 a transcribed scripture, brilliant light, gleaming radiance,
and clear command. All this, in order to remove doubts, establish
proofs, caution with portentous signs, and warn against God's
punishments. When Muḥam- 1 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:97. God's House (Bayt
Allāh) is the Kaʿbah in Mecca. 2 In 37/657. Alternatively, Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ1:143) states that the last line of §1.2.2, which speaksof
truthbeingrestoredtoitsowners,cannotbeplacedatthetimeof
ʿAlī'sleavingṢiffīn but has to have been spoken early in his caliphate,
immediately after the pledge of allegiance to him in 35/656. 3 Reading
ʿilm. Or, reading ʿalam, "a time-honored banner." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 116 Text
and Translation فيها حبل الدين وتزعزعت١ سواري اليقين وٱختلف النجر وتشتّت
الأمر وضاق المخرج وعمي المصدر فالهدی خامل والعمی شامل عُصي الرحمان ونصر
الشيطان وخذل الإيمان فٱنهارت دعائمه وتنکّرت معالمه ودرست سبله وعفت ش ُ
رُکه. أطاعوا الشيطان فسلـکوا مسالـکه ووردوا مناهله بهم سارت أعلامه وقام
لواؤه٢ في فتن داستهم بأخفافها ووطئتهم بأظلافها وقامت علی سنابکها٣ فهم
فيها تائهون حائرون جاهلون مفتونون في خير دار وشرّ جيران نومهم سهود وکحلهم
دموع بأرض عالمها ملجم وجاهلها مکرم. 1.2.2ومنها يعني آل النبيّصل ّ ى الله
عليه وعلى آله هم موضع سرّه ول َ جَأُ أمره وعيبة علمه وموئل حکمه وکهوف کتبه
وجبال دينه بهم أقام ٱنحناء ظهره وأذهب ٱرتعاد فرائصه. منها في المنافقين
زرعوا الفجور وسقوه الغرور وحصدوا الثبور. لا يقاس بآل محمّد صل ّ ى الله
عليه وسلّم من هذه الأمّة أحد ولا يسوّى بهم من جرت
نعمتهمعليهأبدًاهمأساسالدينوعماداليقينإليهميفيءالغاليوبهميلحقالتاليولهم
خصائص حقّ الولاية وفيهم الوصيّة والوراثة الآن إذ رجع الحقّ إلی أهله ون ُ قل
إلی منتقله. ١ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.وأصلش،ونسخةفيي: ⟩تزحزحت⟨. ٢ھ،وأضيفتفي ي:
كذا. ش، وأصل ي: سقطت ⟩أطاعوا الشيطان ... وقام لواؤه⟨. ٣ھ، وأضيفت في ي:
كذا.ش،أصلي:سقطت ⟩وقامتعلیسنابکها⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
117 mad arrived,1 people were embroiled in seditions. Religion's rope
was severed, conviction's foundations were shaken, principles were
scattered, the commu- nity was shattered, the egress had narrowed, and a
way out could not be seen. Right guidance was not recognized, and the
blindness was total. The Merciful Lord was disobeyed, Satan was abetted,
and faith had no support. Its pillars had come crashing down, its
features were distorted, its paths had fallen into disre- pair, and its
trails had worn away. In obedience to Satan, people had followed his
ways and alighted at his watering hole.With their support, his banners
were raised high, and his pennants were unfurled. This was a time when
sedition was ascendant, when people were crushed by its steeds and
trampled under its hooves. Enmeshed in its throes, they were in a state
of convulsion, lost, confused, and ignorant. They lived in the best of
abodes but with the worst of neighbors. They lived in a land where the
learned were demeaned and the ignorant esteemed.Here,slumber had turned
intoinsomniaand kohlhadbeen replaced by tears. 1.2.2 From the same
oration, referring to the Prophet's family: They are the embodiments of
God's mystery, the foundations of his creed, the vessels of his
knowledge, the harbors for his wisdom, the havens for his scrip-
tures,andthepeaksof hisreligion.Throughthem,hestraightensreligion'sback
when it becomes crooked, and calms its limbs when it trembles. From the
same oration, referring to the hypocrites: They sowed immorality,
watered it with arrogance, and reaped perdition. No one from this
community may be compared to Muḥammad's family, and no one blessed by
God's favors may be equated with them in this regard. They are the
pillar of religion and the column of certainty. The exaggerator must
return to their position, and the laggard must join up with it. Theirs
is the right of allegiance, theirs the Prophet's testament and
inheritance. Now, in this moment, truth has been restored to its owners
and returned to its home. 1 After Ḥ1:137. These lines, from "fī
fitanin," to the end of the section, have alternatively been read as a
reference to the seditions in ʿAlī's time. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 118 Text
and Translation 1.3ومن خطبته المعروفة بالشِّقْشِقيّة١ 1.3.1أما والله لقد
تقمّصها ٱبن أبي فلان٢ وإنّه ليعلم أنّ محل ّ ي منها محلّ القطب من الرحا ينحدر
عنّي السيل ولا يرقی إليّ الطير. فسدلت دونها ثوبًا وطويت عنها کشحًا وطفقت
أرتإي بين أن أصول بيد جذّاء أو أصبر علی طخية عمياء يهرم فيها الـکبير ويشب
ّ ٣ فيها الصغير ويکدح فيها مؤمن حتّی يلقی فيها ربّه. فرأيت أنّ الصبر علی
هاتا أحجی فصبرت .اً بهن يثارت یرأ ىجش قلحلا يفو یذق نيعلا يفو 1.3.2حتّی
مضی الأوّل لسبيله فأدلی بها إلی فلان بعده. ثمّتمثّل عليه السلام٤ ٰ لَ ع يِمْوَ
ي اَم َناَ ّتَش ی کُورِهَا ـَ يَو ـَ ّيَحُمْوـ ـانٍ أَخِـ ٖرِ باَج يـ .اهيعرض ارّطشت ام
ّدشل .هتافو دعب رخآل اهدقع ذإ هتايح يف اهليقتسي وه انيب اً بجع ايف فصيّرها
في حوزة خشناء يغلظ کَلْمها ويخشن مسّها ويکثر العثار والاعتذار منها. ١ش، ي:
كذا. ھ: أضيفت ⟩والمقمّصة⟨. ٢ش: كذا، وكلمة ⟩فلان⟨مثبتة مكان كلمة محيت
لعلّها ⟩قحافة⟨. ھ: سقطت ⟩ٱبن أبي⟨، ولـكن قبل لفظة ⟩فلان⟨بياض ربّما حيث
مُحيت ⟩ٱبن أبي⟨. ي: سقطت ⟩ٱبن أبي⟨، وأضيفت فوق لفظة "فلان" ⟩ٱبن أبي
قحافة⟨. ٣ش، ھ، مع علامة الصحّة، ويبدو أصل ي: كذا. ومصحّحة في ي، ونسخة في
ش: ⟩يشيب⟨. ٤البحر: السريع.ش،ي:كذا.ھ:أضيفت ⟩بقولالأعشی⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
119 1.3 FromanorationbyʿAlīknownasShiqshiqiyyah---"TheRoarof
theCamelStallion":1 1.3.1 By God, that man donned its cloak knowing that
I am the pivot to its grinding stone---its stream flows from my summit
and no soaring bird can reach my heights. I draped a curtain across it
and turned my face away. I weighed two options: strike with an amputated
hand or endure a blind dark- ness that renders adults infirm and
children old, in which believers continue to brave toil and turmoil
until they meet their Lord. I saw that forbearance was the judicious
choice. So I endured---but my eyes filled with dust and my throat choked
as I saw my inheritance looted. 1.3.2 Thus it was, until the first went
on his way, tossing it to another after him. Then ʿAlī recited a
testimonial verse:2 O how different my days today, always in the saddle,
and the days spent in the company of Jābir's brother, Ḥayyān! How
strange that he should wish to give it up during his lifetime yet secure
it for another after his death! The two divided the milk from its udders
between them! This next one corralled it to a stony field, where any who
ventured sus- tained deep wounds and experienced rough passage. How
often did people stumble in this terrain, and how often did they make
excuses for stumbling! 1 Delivered in Raḥbah, south of Kufa, toward the
end of ʿAlī's caliphate, in response to Ibn ʿAbbās's query about the
Prophet's succession, according to Mufīd (Irshād, 287). Sibṭ(Tadhki-
rah, 124) states it was delivered on the pulpit of the Prophet's Mosque
in Medina in 35/656, soon after ʿAlī was pledged allegiance as caliph,
in response to a person calling out to him, "What kept you back until
now?", but this earlier dating is unlikely given the reference in the
final section (§1.3.4) to the three groups who rebelled against him.
"It" in the first line is the caliphate, and "that man" (lit. Ibn Abī
fulān, "son of so-and-so") is Abū Bakr, the first historical caliph. The
second individual (§1.3.2) is Umar, and "the third" (§1.3.3) is ʿUthmān;
"his clan" refers to the Umayyads. This oration is controversial because
of its political con- tent, but it is not so different from materials
recorded by the earliest historians: Ibn Hishām (Sīrah, 2:489--490),
Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 4:231--233, 5:7--8), Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:126), and Ibn
Qutay- bah (Imāmah, 1:28--33), all note ʿAlī's refusal to accept Abū
Bakr as caliph until forced to do so. They also record ʿAlī's
declarations about his right to the caliphate immediately after Muḥam-
mad's death, and during the deliberations of ʿUmar's Shūrā council. For
details of this issue and further primary sources, see Madelung, The
Succession to Muḥammad, 28--33, 141, and passim; and Madelung,
"S̲h̲īʿa,"ei2. The Shiʿi commentators read the oration as proof of ʿAlī's
imamate, while the Sunni commentators read it as an articulation of
ʿAlī's superiority over all other Companions of the Prophet. B 153--155;
R 1:122; Ḥ1:156--159; ʿA 565. 2 By the pre-Islamic poet Aʿshā Maymūn
(d. ca. 7/629), Dīwān al-Aʿshā, 147, §18, verse 57. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 120 Text
and Translation هللا رمعل سانلا ينُ مف مّحقت اهل سلسأ نإو مرخ اهل قنشأ نإ
ةبعصلا بکارک اهبحاصف بخبط وشِماس وتلوّن وٱعتراض. فصبرت علی طول المدّة وشدّة
المحنة. 1.3.3حتّی إذا مضی لسبيله جعلها في جماعة زعم أن ّ ي أحدهم فيا لله
وللشوری متی ٱعترض الريب فيّمع الأوّل منهم حتّی صرت أقرن إلی هذه النظائر
لـکنّي أسففت إذ أسفّوا وطرت إذ طاروا فصغى رجل منهم لضغنه ومال الآخر لصهره
مع هَنٍ وهَنٍ إلی هللا لام نومضخي هيبأ ونب هعم ماقو هفلتعمو هليثن نيب هينضح
اً جفان موقلا ثلاث ماق نأ تعالى خضم الإبل نبتة الربيع. 1.3.4إلی أن ٱنتکث
عليه فتله وأجهز عليه عمله وکبت به بطنته. فما راعني إلّا والناس إليّکعُرف
الضبع ينثالون عليّمن کل جانب١ حتّی لقد وُطیء الحسنان وشقّ عطافي مجتمعين حولي
کربيضة الغنم. فلمّا نهضت بالأمر نکثت طائفة ومرقت أخری وفسق ُ لَعْجَنُةَرِخآلٱُرا
َ ّدلٱ َكْلِ ت﴿ لوقي هناحبس هللا اوعمسي مل مّهنأک نورخآ َنوُديِرُ ي اَل َنيِذَ ّلِ
ل اَه َ ف اَلَو ِضْرَألٱ يِف اً ّوُ لُ ع سَادًا وَٱلْعَاقِب َ مهّنکٰـلو اهوعوو اهوعمس دقل
هللاو یلب .﴾َنيِقَ ّتُ مْلِ لُة حليت الدنيا في أعينهم وراقهم زبرجها. أما والذي
فلق الحبّة وبرأ النمسة لولا حضور الحاضر وقيام الحجّة بوجود الناصر وما أخذ
الله علی العلماء ألّا يقارّوا علی کِظّة ظالم ولا سغب مظلوم لألقيت حبلها علی
غاربها ولسقيت آخرها بکأس أوّلها ولألفيتم دنياکم هذه أزهد عندي من عفطة
عنز. ١ش،ونسخةفيي:كذا.ھ،وأصلي: ⟩وجه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 121 Any who traversed it rode a bucking camel---tighten its
rein and slit its nose or loosen the ropes and be thrown. By God, the
community was struck by kick- ing feet and rearing hooves and tormented
with caprice and obstruction. I endured---but it was a long time and a
harsh affliction. 1.3.3 Thus it was, until, when he went on his way, he
handed it over to a group of people he supposed I belonged with. Dear
God, what a Council! Was there doubt regarding my stature, even in
comparison with the first of them, that I was now being equated with
these laggards! But I moved with them, falling when they fell and flying
when they flew. Even so, one of them turned away from me because of an
old grudge,1 another inclined toward someone else because he was related
to him by marriage,2 along with this one and that one, until the third
stood up, bosom swelling with pride, amid his dung and fodder. His clan
stood up with him, munching on God's property like a herd of camels
munching on spring grass. 1.3.4 Thus it was, until its strands came
apart in his hands and his own actions delivered the death blow. It was
greed that brought him to the ground. Then
suddenly,peoplewereflockingtome,thickasahyena'smane,tramplingḤasan and
Ḥusayn and rending my own shirt, pressing in on me from every side like
a surging herd of camels.3 But when I rose to undertake its charge, one
group of rebels broke their pledge, another deserted the faith, and a
third went astray. Had they never heard God's words, «We shall reserve
the hereafter for those who do not seek to exalt themselves on the earth
or spread corruption. The good end is for the godfearing»?4Yes, byGod,
they heard and understood it, but the world appeared bejeweled to their
eyes and her ornaments dazzled them. I
swearbyhimwhosplitopentheseed,theonewhocreatedlivingbeings---were it not
for those who appealed to me in that time, if the presence of support-
ers had not made it my binding duty, if God had not taken a pledge from
the learnedthattheywouldnotpermittyrantstoravageorthesubjugatedtostarve,
I would have flung the caliphate's reins onto its shoulders and offered
the same cup to its latest emissary that I had offered to its earliest
one. If not for this, you would have seen that your world means less to
me than the sneeze of a goat. 1 Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ. R 1:122; Ḥ1:184,
189. 2 ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf. Ḥ1:189. 3 Similar lines in §1.53,
§1.135.2, §1.226. 4 Qurʾan, Qaṣaṣ28:83. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 122 Text
and Translation 1.3.5قالوا وقام اليه رجل من أهل السواد عند بلوغه إلی هذا
الموضع من خطبته فناولهکتابًا فأقبل ينظر فيه. فلمّا فرغ من قراءته قال له
ٱبن عبّاس رحمة الله عليه يا أمير المؤمنين لو ٱطّردت مقالتک من حيث أفضيت
فقال هيهات يٱبن عبّاس تلـک شقشقة هدرت ثمّقرّت قال ٱبن عبّاس فوالله ما أسفت
علی کلام قط ّ کأسفي علی ذلك الکلام ألّا يکون أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام
بلغ منه حيث أراد. 1.3.6قوله عليه السلام في هذه الخطبة ⟩کراکب الصعبة إن
أشنق لها خرم وإن أسلس لها تقحّم⟨يريد أنّه إذا شدّد عليها في جذب الزمام وهي
تنازعه رأسها خرم أنفها وإن أرخی لها هعفرف مامزلاب اهسأر بذج اذإ⟨ةقانلا
قنشأ⟩ لاقي .اهکـلمي ملف هب تمّحقت اهتبوعص عم اً ئيش و⟩شنقها⟨أيضًا. ذ کر
ذلـک ٱبن السکّيت في إصلاح المنطق. وإنّما قال ⟩أشنق لها⟨ولم يقل
⟩أشنقها⟨لأنّه جعلها في مقابلة قوله ⟩أسلس لها⟨فکأنّه عليه السلام قال ⟩إن
رفع لها رأسها بالزمام⟨بمعنی أمسکه عليها. 1.4ومن خطبة له عليه السلام بنا
ٱهتديتم في الظلماء وتسنّمتم العلياء وبنا ٱنفجرتم عن السِّرار. وُقِر سمع لم
يفقه الواعية کيف يراعي النبأة من أصمّته الصيحة رُبط جنان لم يفارقه
الخفقان. ما زلت أنتظر بکم عواقب الغدر وأتوسّمکم بحلية المغترّين سترني عنکم
جلباب الدين وبصّرنيکم صدق النيّة أقمت لـکم علی سنن الحقّ في جوادّ المضل ّ
.نوهيمُ ت الو نورفتحتو ليلد الو نوقتلت ثيح ة
اليومأُنطقلـکمالعجماءذاتالبيانعزبرأيٱمرئتخلّفعنّيماشککتفيالحقّ al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
123 1.3.5
WhenʿAlīreachedthispointinhisoration,avisitorfromthecountrysidehanded
him a petition, and he paused to look at it. When he had finished
reading, Ibn ʿAbbās asked, "Commander of the Faithful, will you not
continue your speech where you left off?" "No, Ibn ʿAbbās," ʿAlī
replied, "that was the roar of a camel stallion that burst out then
subsided." Ibn ʿAbbās remarked, "By God, I have never regretted the loss
of any words as much as I regret the loss of these---if only the
Commander of the Faithful had completed what he began!" 1.3.6 Raḍī:
ʿAlī's words in this oration: "Any who traversed it rode a bucking
camel--- tighten its rein and slit its nose, or loosen it and be
thrown," mean that if the rider were to pull strongly on the reins of a
bucking came while it pulled the other way, he would slit its nose, but
if he were to slacken them a little, then that, coupled with the camel's
recalcitrance, would mean that the camel would throw him off, for he
would be unable to control it. It is said, "He tightened the reins of
the camel mare" (ashnaqa l-
nāqata),whensomeonepullsbackthecamel'smuzzlewiththenose-reinandliftsitup;
the basic form of the verb (shanaqa) is also used---Ibn al-Sikkīt
mentions this in Iṣlāḥ al-manṭiq (Correcting Speech). ʿAlī said, "He
tightened for it its reins (ashnaqa lahā)" (using the preposition li-),1
rather than "He tightened its reins (ashnaqahā)" (with the camel as
direct object), because he wanted to preserve the parallelism with "if
he loos- ened them (aslasa lahā)," where he also used the preposition
li-. It is as though ʿAlī said, "if he raised the camel's head upward
with the nose-rein," meaning that he held the camel tightly by means of
it. 1.4 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 Through us you received guidance in
the dark night, mounted the camel's lofty hump, and emergedfroma
moonlessnight intothelight of dawn.Howdeaf are the ears that don't hear
the mourners' wails! Can people whom a clap of thun- der fails to awaken
be expected to heed a gentle voice? How calm is the heart that shudders
in fear of God! I knew you would be treacherous, for I saw you donning
seduction's garb. But I wear the robe of religion, and it has prevented
me from harming you, though my righteous spirit showed me clearly what
you were. I stood up to guide you back to the trodden path of truth,
from all those trails where you had wandered without a guide, where you
had dug for water but found none. Today I have made mute signs, eloquent
ones, speak to you. Those who held back from me have strayed. I never
doubted the truth since it 1 Li- is the usual form of this preposition,
but it changes to la- before pronominals, as it has here and a few lines
below. 2 After the Battle of the Camel in 36/656, posthumously
addressing Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, and their defeated followers. R 136, after
Miskawayh; Ḥ1:209; B 164. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 124 Text and
Translation مذ أريته لم يوجس موسی خيفة علی نفسه أشفق من غلبة الجهّال ودول
الضلّال اليوم تواقفنا علی سبيل الحقّ والباطل من وثق بماء لم يظمأ. 1.5ّ لص
هللا لوسر ضبق اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو ی الله عليه وآله وخاطبه
العبّاس وأبو سفيان ٱبن حرب في أن يبايعاه بالخلافة أيّها الناس شقّوا أمواج
الفتن بسفن النجاة وعرّجوا عن طريق المنافرة وضعوا تيجان المفاخرة. أفلح من
نهض بجناح أو ٱستلسم فأراح. ماء آجن ولقمة يغص ّ بها آکلها ومجتني الثمرة
لغير وقت إيناعها کالزارع بغير أرضه فإن أقل يقولوا حرص علی الملـک وإن
أسکت يقولوا جزع من الموت هيهات \>بعد اللتيا والتي\< والله لٱبن أبي طالب
آنس بالموت من الطفل بثدي أمّه بل ٱندمجت علی مکنون علم لو بُحْت ُ به
لٱضطربتم ٱضطراب الأرشية في الطوي ّ البعيدة. 1.6لاتقلا امهل دصري الو
ريبزلاو ةحلط عبّتي اّلأب هيلع ريشأ اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالک نمو ُ ب َ
ّضلاک نوکأ ال هللاو اهدصار اهّلتخيو اهبلاط اهيلإ لصي یّتح مْدَ ّللا لوط یلع
مانت ع al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
125 was shown to me. Moses was not fearful for his life---what he feared
was the dominance of the ignorant and the control of the errant.1 Today,
we faced off on the battlefield, one on the side of right, the other on
the side of wrong. A man who knows he will find water does not feel
thirst. 1.5 An address ʿAlī delivered when God's Messenger passed away,
and ʿAbbās and Abū Sufyān came to him offering the pledge of caliphal
allegiance:2 People! Cut through the waves of rebellion by boarding the
ark of salvation. Leave the path of dissension and cast off the crown of
pride. Success comes to those who rise when they have support, or yield
and let people be. This affair resembles murky water, or a morsel that
chokes those who swallow it. One who plucks before his time gains as
little as one who plants in another's field. If I say something now,
they will respond, "He covets power." If I remain silent, they will cry,
"He is afraid of being killed!" No, indeed, ⟨not after the small
calamity and the large one⟩!3 By God, Abū Ṭālib's son is more
comfortable with death than an infant at his mother's breast! But I hold
knowledge of mysteries.Were I to reveal them to you, you would tremble
like ropes hanging down deep wells. 1.6 From an address ʿAlī delivered
when advised not to pursue Ṭalḥah and Zubayr or make preparations to
fight them:4 By God, I shall not behave like the hyena that, sleeping
through a prolonged barrage of pebbles, is captured by the stealthy
hunter.5 I call on men who have 1 Refers to the Qurʾanic story of Moses
(Qurʾan, Hūd 11:70,Ṭāhā 20:67), and compares ʿAlī's story to it. 2 In
11/632, in Medina. Ṭabrisī (Iḥtijāj, 1:127) cites the first three lines
as part of a note ʿAlī wrote to Abū Bakr, after he had denied Fāṭimah
her right to inherit the orchards of Fadak. ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib
was ʿAlī and Muḥammad's uncle. Abū Sufyān was Muʿāwiyah's father and
Muḥammad's arch foe, before he converted to Islam following the
Prophet's conquest of Mecca. The two---ʿAbbās and Abū Sufyān---were
close associates. 3 Proverb signifying all sorts of calamities (etiology
in Maydānī, Majmaʿ, 1:92), signifying that ʿAlī has faced death on the
battlefield throughout his life. 4 In Rabadhah, near Medina, in 36/656,
enrouteto Iraq in the lead-up to the Battle of the Camel (Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 4:455--456), or in Dhū Qār, soon after arriving in Iraq (ibid.,
4:457--458); ʿAlī's son Ḥasan is named as his interlocutor. 5 See
similar phraseology in §1.146. The signification of the simile is being
naively unaware of danger despite ample warning. In medieval Arab lore,
the hyena (ḍabuʿ) is reputed to be a stupid animal. Easily tricked by
the hunter who throws pebbles to draw it out, it emerges from its den,
thinking to find prey, and is killed. Hyenas were apparently hunted as
food; their meat is considered licit in the Shāfiʿī and Ḥanbalī schools
of law, and a delicacy in present-day Saudi Arabia (Osborne, "Hyena
Burger?"). B 170; R 149; Ḥ224; Ibn Manẓūr, Lisān, s.v. "L-D-Gh"; Jāḥiẓ,
Ḥayawān, 6:38, 7:48; Damīrī, Ḥayāt al-ḥayawān, 2:206. For further
details and sources, see Viré, "Ḍabuʿ,"ei2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 126 Text
and Translation ولـکنّي أضرب بالمقبل إلی الحقّ المدبر عنه وبالسامع المطيع
العاصي المريب أبدًا حتّی
يأتيعليّيومي.فواللهمازلتمدفوعًاعنحقّيمستأثرًاعليّمنذقبضاللهنبيّهصل ّ ىالله
عليه حتّی يوم الناس هذا. 1.7ومن خطبة له عليه السلام اتّخذوا الشيطان لأمرهم
مِلاکًا١ وٱتّخذهم له أشراکًا فباض وفرّخ في صدورهم ودب ّ
ودرجفيحجورهمفنظربأعينهمونطقبألسنتهمفرکببهمالزللوزي ّ نلهمالخطلفعل من قد
شر که الشيطان في سلطانه ونطق بالباطل علی لسانه. 1.8ومن کلام له عليه
السلام يعني به الزبير يزعم أنّه قد بايع بيده ولم يبايع بقلبه فقد
أقرّبالبيعة وٱدّعی الوليجة فليأت عليها بأمر يعرف وإلّا فليدخل فيما خرج منه.
1.9ومن کلام له عليه السلام وقد أرعدوا وأبرقوا ومع هٰذين الأمرين الفشل
ولسنا نرعد حتی نوقع ولا نسيل حتّی نمطر. 1.10ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
ألاوإنّ الشيطانقدجمعحزبهوٱستجلبخيلهورجلهوإنّ بصيرتيلمعي٢مالبّستعلی
نفسيولالبّسعليّوٱيماللهلأفرطنّ لهمحوضًاأناماتحهلايصدرونعنهولايعودون إليه.
١ش،ي:كذا.ھ: ⟩مالكًا⟨. ٢ش:كذا.ي،ھ: ⟩وإنّ معيلبصيرتي⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 127 accepted the truth to attack those who have turned away.
I call on those who hear and obey to fight those doubters who have
disobeyed. I shall continue to call on you until my appointed time
arrives. By God! From the day God took his Messenger unto him until this
day, I have been continually driven away from this thing that is mine by
right and passed over for another. 1.7 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 They
made Satan master of their affairs and he made them his partners. He
laid eggs in their breasts and hatched chicks. He frolicked in their
laps and romped. He watched with their eyes and spoke with their
tongues. He incited them to
errorandluredthemtotreachery.Theiractionsaretheactionsof peoplewhose
rule Satan shares and on whose tongues he utters his falsehoods. 1.8
From an address ʿAlī delivered about Zubayr:2 He declares that he
pledged allegiance with his hand but not his heart. So he admits his
pledge, although he claims he withheld intent. Let him bring tangi- ble
proof of that, or else return to the pledge he has forsaken. 1.9 From an
address ʿAlī delivered:3 They thundered and blazed but that is the way
of cowards. My thunder always strikes, and my torrent is always
propelled by rain. 1.10 From an oration by ʿAlī:4 Hark! Satan has
mustered his host and armed his cavalry and infantry. But my conviction
has not deserted me, I have never deceived nor been deceived. By God, I
shall fill the waterhole for them as only I can---they shall not leave
sated or return.5 1 Presumably referring to ʿAlī's challengers at the
battles of the Camel, Ṣiffīn, or Nahrawān. The referents are described
by Rāwandī as "the errant leaders" (aʾimmat al-ḍalāl), but neither he
nor the other major commentators specify names. Ḥ1:228; B 170--171; R
1:151--152. 2 Responding just before the Battle of the Camel, in 36/656,
to a speech by Zubayr's son ʿAbdal- lāh, in which he stated his father's
claim. Mufīd, Jamal, 175, after Wāqidī. 3 Refers to ʿAlī's challengers
at the Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (R 1:154, B 173). The lines are
from an oration ʿAlī delivered in response to a speech by Ṭalḥah, just
before battle com- menced. Mufīd, Jamal, 177, after Wāqidī. 4 Delivered
at Dhū Qār, thus in 36/656, en route to Basra (B 172), referring to
ʿAlī's challengers at the Battle of the Camel. Alternatively, delivered
at an unspecified time, and referring to Muʿāwiyah (Ḥ1:240; R 1:155).
See similar lines in §1.22 and §1.135. 5 The "waterhole" here refers to
battle, and by saying he will fill it as only he can, ʿAlī refers to his
prowess in combat. Ḥ1:240; R 155. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 128 Text and
Translation 1.11لمجلا موي ةيارلا هاطعأ اّ مل ةّيفنحلا نب دّمحم هنبٱل مالسلا
هيلع همالک نمو تزول الجبال ولا تزل عض ّ علی ناجذ ک أعر الله جمجمتک ت ِ دْ
في الأرض قدمک ٱرم ببصرک أقصی القوم وغض ّ بصرک وٱعلم أنّ النصر من عند الله
سبحانه. 1.12ّنأ تددو هباحصأ ضعب هل لاق دقو لمجلا باحصأب رفظ اّ مل مالسلا
هيلع هل مالک نمو
أخي١کانشاهدًاليریمانصرکاللهبهعلیأعدائکفقالأَهَویأخيکمعنافقالنعمقال
فقدشهدنا.ولقدشهدنافیعسکرناهذاقومفيأصلابالرجالوأرحامالنساءسيرعف بهم
الزمان ويقوی بهم الإيمان. 1.13ومن کلام له عليه السلام في ذمّ البصرة
وأهلها کنتم جند المرأة وأتباع البهيمة رغا فأجبتم وعُقر فهربتم أخلاقکم
دقاق وعهد کم شقاق ودينکم نفاق وماؤ کم زُعاق المقيم بين أظهر کم مرتهن
بذنبه والشاخص عنکم متدارک برحمة من ربّه. کأن ّ ي بمسجد کم کجؤجؤ سفينة قد
بعث الله عليها العذاب من فوقها ومن تحتها وغرّق من في ضمنها. وفي رواية
أخرى وٱيم الله لتغرقنّ بلدتکم حتّی کأن ّ ي أنظر إلی مسجدها کجؤجؤ سفينة أو
ن َ عامة جاثمة. ويروى کجؤجؤ طير في لُج ّ ة بحر. ١ش:كذا.ي،ھ:أضيفت ⟩فلانًا⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
129 1.11 From an address ʿAlī delivered to his son Muḥammad ibn
al-Ḥanafiyyah, while entrusting him with the banner at the Battle of the
Camel:1 Mountains may move, but you should not. Clench your teeth. Lend
God your skull.2 Dig your feet into the earth. Keep an eye on your
farthest foes but focus
onthosewhoareclose.Aboveall,knowthis:VictorycomesfromAlmightyGod. 1.12
From an address by ʿAlī, after his victory at the Battle of the Camel.
One of his supporters said to him, "I wish my brother were present to
witness the victory God has granted you over your enemies." ʿAlī asked,
"Does your brother's loyalty lie with us?" The man replied, "Yes," and
ʿAlī declared:3 Then he has witnessed us. Indeed, our fight has been
witnessed by a mighty host in the loins of men and the wombs of women.
Time will bring them forth and faith will gain strength. 1.13 An address
ʿAlī delivered criticizing Basra and rebuking its people:4 You fought
for the woman and followed the camel---when it bellowed, you answered,
when it was killed, you fled. Your character is base, your custom is
dissent, your faith is hypocrisy, and your water is bitter. Whoever
resides with you is ensnared in sin, whoever leaves you is saved by
God's mercy. I can see your mosque now, the prow of a ship enveloped by
God's punishment from above and below. All on board will drown. A
variant narrative: I swear by God, your city will drown! I see your
mosque like a ship's prow, or a squatting ostrich. It is also narrated
as: Like a bird's breast rising above the swells of the sea. 1 Basra,
36/656. 2 The commentators decode the metaphor as putting one's life on
the line to defend God's religion; they also say the word "lend" (aʿir),
(rather than "give"), denotes a promise that Ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah would not
be killed in this battle. R 158--159, B 173, Ḥ1:242. 3 According to
Baḥrānī (B 174), this and the next texts (presumably §1.13--1.14) are
from a single oration ʿAlī delivered in Basra three days after the
Battle of the Camel in Basra, in 36/656. He had criers call out for the
people to gather, and when they had assembled, he stepped into the
mosque, prayed the morning prayer, stood on the right side of the prayer
niche with his back against the wall, and gave this speech. The lines
are also placed at Nahrawān, following the battle there in 38/658.
Barqī, Maḥāsin, 1:262. 4 See note to §1.12. The reference in the first
line is to ʿĀʾishah and the camel she rode onto the battlefield at the
Battle of the Camel. B 175; Ḥ1:252. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 130 Text
and Translation 1.14ومن کلام له في مثل ذلك أرضکم قريبة من الماء بعيدة من
السماء. خفّت عقولـکم وسفهت حلومکم فأنتم غرض لنابل وأکلة لآکل وفريسة
لصائل.١ 1.15ومن كلام له عليه السلام فيما ردّه على المسلمين من قطائع عثمان
قاضنموةعسلدعلايف ّنإفهتددرلءامإلاهبكلُموءاسنلاهبجّوُزُ تدقهتدجوولهللاو عليه
العدل فالجور عليه أضيق. 1.16ةنيدملاب عيوب اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نم
ذمّتيبماأقولرهينةوأنابهزعيمإنّ منصرّحتلهالعبرعمّابينيديهمنالمثلاتحجزه التقوى
عن تقحّم الشبهات ألا وإنّ بليّتكم قد عادت كهيئتها يوم بعث الله نبيّه والذي
بعثهبالحقّ لتبلبلنّ بلبلةولتغربلنّ غربلةولتساطنّ سوطالقدرحتّىيعودأسفلـكمأعلا
كم وأعلا كم أسفلـكم وليسبقنّ سابقون كانوا قصّروا وليقصّرنّ سبّاقون كانوا
سبقوا. والله ما كتمت وشمة ولا كذبت كذبة ولقد نبّئت بهذا المقام وهذا
اليوم. ألا وإنّ الخطايا خيل شمس حمل عليها أهلها وخلعت لجمها فتقحّمت بهم في
النار ألا وإنّ التقوى مطايا ذلل حمل عليها أهلها وأعطوا أزمّتها فأوردهم
الجنّة. حقّ وباطل ولكلّ أهل فلئن أَمِر ةّنجلا نم لغش .لبقأف ءيش ربدأ امّ لقلو
ّلعلو امّبرل ّقحلا ّلق نئلو لعف اً ميدقل لطابلا والنار أمامه. ساعٍ سريع نجا
وطالب بطيء رجا ومقصّر في النار. اليمين والشمال مضل ّ ة ١ش،ي:كذا.ھ:
⟩لصائد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
131 1.14 From a similar address delivered by ʿAlī:1 Your land is close
to the sea and far from the sky. Your wits are feeble and your minds are
weak. You are targets for the archer, morsels for the greedy, and easy
prey for all who would attack. 1.15 ʿAlī's address defending his
restoration of ʿUthmān'sland grants to the public trea- sury:2 By God,
even if the money had been spent to wed women or buy slave-girls, I
would still have required its return. Justice has a wide scope---whoever
finds it narrow should know that oppression is even more limiting. 1.16
From an address ʿAlī delivered when the pledge of allegiance was sworn
to him in Medina:3 I guarantee the truth of what I say and stand as
surety for my pledge.To be cau- tioned by history's lessons is to be
protected by piety from galloping headlong into the abyss of doubt. Hark
my words! You are being tested today, just as you were on the day God
sent his Prophet. I swear by the one who sent him with the truth that
you will be tossed hither and thither, sifted as in a sieve, and mixed
and mingled as if in a boiling cauldron. Lowly folk will rise, and
others in high positions will fall. Stragglers will race to the front,
and others who are ahead will fall behind. By God, I have never held
back a true word or spoken a single lie, and I was told of the arrival
of this place and day. Hark my words! Sins are recalcitrant steeds,
charging unreined with their riders into the Fire. Hear me! Piety is a
docile mount that carries its riders, reins firm in their hands,
steadily to paradise. There is truth and there is falsehood, and each
has its people--- what is new if falsehood prevails? Truth has few
followers, and those who turn away rarely return. Those who see paradise
or hellfire ahead have enough to occupy them. The swift runner is saved,
the man who is tardy has hope, but the delinquent will end in the Fire.
The right and the left lead to error, the middle 1 See note to §1.12.
Wāqidī, cited in Mufīd, Jamal, 218, also places this oration on the
battlefield immediately after the Battle of the Camel. 2 Lit. "to the
Muslims." ʿAlī delivered this oration in Medina in 35/656, soon after
allegiance was pledged to him as caliph (B 178; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim, 1:396).
The second sentence also forms part of ʿAlī's address to Marwān et
al. when they refused to pledge him allegiance (Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:179).
3 First oration after assuming the caliphate in Medina in 35/656,
delivered on the pulpit in the mosque;oneof
ʿAlī'smostwidelynarratedorations(Jāḥiẓ, Bayān,3:50--52,whoaddsasection
on the excellence of the Prophet's family, narrated by Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq).
Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:211) states that the oration was prompted by a man
who criticized ʿAlī's judgment in a case he had brought before him.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 132 Text and
Translation
والطريقالوسطىهيالجادّةعليهاباقيالكتابوآثارالنبوّةومنهامنفذالسنّةوإليهامصير
العاقبة. هلك من ٱدّعى و﴿خَاب ةلهج دنع كله ّقحلل هتحفص ىدبأ نم﴾ٰىَرَ تْفٱ ِنَم َ
الناس. وكفى بالمرء جهل ً ا ألّا يعرف قدره. لا يهلك على التقوى سنخ أصل ولا
يظمأ عليه زرع قوم. فٱستتروا ببيوتكم وأصلحوا ذات بينكم والتوبة من ورائكم.
ولا يحمد حامد إلّا ربّه ولا يلم لائم إلّا نفسه. وأقولإنّ
فيهذاالكلاممنمواقعالإحسانمالاتبلغهمواقعالاستحسانوإنّ حظ ّ العَجَب منه أكثر
من حظ ّ العُجب به وفيه مع الحال التي وصفنا زوائد من الفصاحة لا يقوم بها
لسان ولا يطّلع فج ّ ها إنسان ولا يعرف ما أقوله إلّا من ضرب في هذه الصناعة
بحقّ وجرى فيها على عرق وما يعقلها إلّا العالمون. 1.17ومن كلام له عليه
السلام في صفة من يتصدّى للحكم بين الأمّة وليس لذلك بأهل إنّ
أبغضالخلائقإلىاللهرجلان.رجلوكّلهاللهإلىنفسهفهوجائرعنقصدالسبيل مشغوف بكلام
بدعة ودعاء ضلالة فهو فتنة لمن ٱفتتن به ضالّ عن هدى من كان قبله مضلّ لمن
ٱقتدى به في حياته وبعد وفاته حمّال خطايا غيره رهن بخطيئته. ورجل َ مَ ق ش َ
جهل ً امُوضِـعٌ فيجهّالالأمّةغارٌّفيأغباشالفتنةعمٍ بمافيعقدالهدنةقدسمّاه
ىوترٱاذإىّتحرثكاّممريخهنم ّلقامعمجنمرثكتسٱفرّكبهبسيلواً ملاعسانلاهابشأ ىلع
سبتلٱ ام صيلختل اً نماض اً يضاق سانلا نيب سلج لئاط ريغ نم رثكأو نجآ نم سبل
نم وهف .هب عطقّمث هيأر نم اً ّثر اًوشح اهل أّيه تامهبملا ىدحإ هب تلزن نإف
هريغ الشبهاتفيمثلنسجالعنكبوتلايدريأصابأمأخطأإنأصابخافأنيكون al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
133 way is the straight road, upon it you will find the remnants of
scripture and the traces of prophecy, from it emerged the Sunnah, to it
the people shall return. False claimants will perish and «those who lie
will fail.»1 Those who side with the truth will suffer at the hands of
the ignorant. It is manifest ignorance for a man not to know his own
worth! But fields sown by the pious will not wither. Roots planted by
them will not shrivel. People, maintain the privacy of your homes and
resolve your differences, and you will be forgiven. Praise only your
Lord and blame only yourselves. Raḍī: No admiration can encompass the
beauty in these words; the awe they inspire exceeds any expression of
appreciation.They have so much linguistic brilliance that no tongue can
do them justice and no human can plumb their deep ravine. Only expert
knowledge of this craft and an innate disposition for it can comprehend
what I allude to. Only the learned can grasp the full meaning of this
oration. 1.17 From an address ʿAlī delivered describing men who set
themselves up as judges for the community when they are far from
qualified:2 The most hateful creatures in God's eyes are of two kinds:
The first is a man whom God has given up on and left to his own devices.
Straying from the straight path, enamored of heretical innovation and
errant agitation, he en- snares many. Having lost his predecessors' path
of right guidance, he leads people astray in his lifetime and continues
his misguidance after his death. Surely, he will bear the burden of
their sins, while remaining hostage to his own. The second collects
scraps of ignorance and engages with the commu- nity's dolts. Heedless
of the black beasts of mutiny, he is blind to the benefits of
peace.Hiscomradescallhimascholar,butheisnot.Heishastytoamassthings of
which less is better than more. When he has drunk his fill of stagnant
water and increased his store without profit, he sits down to dispense
judgment, to elucidate what has perplexed others. When faced with an
impenetrable case, he stitches together a jumble of rags concocted from
his own capricious opin- ions, then passes judgment. Yet, he remains
entangled in a web of doubt,3 not 1 Qurʾan, Ṭāhā 20:61. 2
Māmaṭīrī(Nuzhah,317--319),AbūṬālibal-Makkī(Qūtal-qulūb,1:246),andHārūnī(Taysīr,259)
connect this oration to the previous one, viz., ʿAlī's accession speech,
§1.16. Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:211) also connects it, but he places the
oration in a different context; see note at §1.16. 3 Echoes Qurʾan,
ʿAnkabūt 29:41. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 134 Text and
Translation قد أخطأ وإن أخطأ رجا أن يكون قد أصاب. جاهل خبّاط جهالات عاشٍ
ركّاب عشوات لم يعض ّ على العلم بضرس قاطع يذري الروايات إذراء الريح الهشيم
لا مليء والله بإصدار ما ورد عليه لا يحسب العلم في شيء ممّا أنكره ولا يرى
أنّ من وراء ما بلغ روج نم خرصت .هسفن لهج نم ملعي امل هب متتكٱ رمأ هيلع
ملظأ نإو هريغل اً بهذم هنم قضائه الدماء وتعجّ منه المواريث. إلى الله أشكو
من معشر يعيشون جهّالًا ويموتون ضلّالًا ليس فيهم سلعة أبور من الكتاب إذا تلي
حقّ تلاوته ولاسلعة أنفق بيعًا ولا أغلى نم فرعأ الو فورعملا نم ركنأ مهدنع
الو هعضاوم نع فّرح اذإ باتكلا نم اً نمث المنكر. 1.18ومن كلام له عليه
السلام في ذمّ ٱختلاف العلماء في الفتيا ترد على أحدهم القضيّة في حكم من
الأحكام فيحكم فيها برأيه ثمّترد تلك القضيّة بعينها على غيره فيحكم فيها
بخلاف قوله ثمّتجتمع القضاة بذلك عند إمامهم الذي ٱستقضاهم فيصوّب آرائهم
جميعًا. وإلٰههم واحد وكتابهم واحد ونبيّهم واحد. أفأمرهم الله تعالى
بالاختلاف فأطاعوه أم نهاهم عنه فعصوه أم أنزل الله دينًا ناقصًا فٱستعان بهم
على ا ً ّمات اًنيد هناحبس هللا لزنأ مأ ىضري نأ هيلعو اولوقي نأ ١مهلف هل
ءاكرش اوناك مأ همامتإ فقصّر الرسول صل ّ طَ ّرَ ف اَم﴿ لوقي هناحبس هللاو
هئادأو هغيلبت نع هلآو هيلع هللا ى يِف اَ ن ْ باَ تِكلٱ ِ مِن ش َ يْءٍ﴾وفيه
تبيان كلّ شيء. وذ كر أنّ الكتاب يصدّق بعضه بعضًا وأنّه لا ﴾اًريِثَك اً فَ الِتْخٱ
ِهيِف اْوُدَجَوَ ل ِهّٰللٱ ِرْيَ غ ِدنِع ْنِم َناَك ْوَ لَو﴿ هناحبس لاقف هيف فالتخٱ وإنّ
القرآن ظاهره أنيق وباطنه عميق لا تفنى عجائبه ولا تنقضي غرائبه ولا تكشف
الظلمات إلّا به. ١تبدأمخطوطةممنهنا. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
135 knowing whether he has judged correctly or erred. When correct, he
is afraid he may have erred. When errant, he hopes he judged correctly.
A total ignora- mus, he stumbles about in his ignorance like the
night-blind riding the steeds of darkness. Never biting into knowledge
with strong teeth, he flings around hadith reports as the wind scatters
dry leaves.1 By God, he is not qualified to judge the cases that come to
his waterhole. He dismisses whatever is beyond his understanding, not
realizing that others have found a path. When a case is too obscure for
him to grasp, he hides the fact, for he knows he lacks knowl- edge.The
blood of the executed screams from his oppression, and inheritances cry
out from his injustice. God, I complain to you of men who live in
ignorance and die in error! No commodity is less profitable to them than
the Qurʾan when explained correctly, no commodity more profitable or
more valuable than that
sameQurʾanwithitsmeaningscorrupted.Nothingforthemisworsethangood,
nothing better than evil. 1.18 From an address ʿAlī delivered censuring
disagreement among jurists:2 When a case comes to one of them, he passes
judgment based on his capri- cious opinion. Then the same case is
brought before someone else, who gives a different judgment. Then all
the judges congregate before the leader who appointed them, and he
confirms all their judgments. This, when their God is
one,theirBookisone,andtheirProphetisone!DidGodcommandthemtodis- agree
such that they are simply obeying him? Rather, did he not forbid it and
they disobeyed? Did God send down an imperfect religion and seek their
help to complete it? Or did he make them his partners such that he must
accept their whims? Or, yet again, did he actually send a perfect
religion, and it was the Messenger who fell short in conveying and
delivering it? God says, «We have omitted nothing from the Book.»3 It
contains clarification of all things. He declares that one part of the
Book supports the other without contradic- tion, saying, «If it had come
from someone other than God, they would have found it to have many
inconsistencies.»4 The Qurʾan's form is elegant, and its content is
deep. Its marvels never fade, and its wonders never run out. Only
through the Qurʾan can darkness be dispelled. 1 Modified quote from
Qurʾan, Kahf 18:45. 2 Ibn Ṭalḥah (Maṭālib, 118) presents this oration as
a continuation of the previous one §1.17. 3 Qurʾan, Anʿām 6:38. 4
Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:82. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 136 Text and
Translation 1.19ومن كلام له عليه السلام قاله للأشعث بن قيس وهو على منبر
الـكوفة يخطب فمضى في بعض كلامه شيء ٱعترضه الأشعث فقال يا أمير المؤمنين
هذه عليك لا لك. فخفض عليه السلام إليه بصره ثمّقال وما يدريك ما عليّ ممّا لي
عليك لعنة الله ولعنة اللاعنين حائك ٱبن حائك منافق ٱبن
كافرواللهلقدأسركالـكفرمرّةوالإسلامأخرىفمافداكمنواحدةمنهمامالكولا حسبك وإنّ
ٱمرأ ًدلّ على قومه السيف وساق إليهم الحتف لحري ّ أن يمقته الأقرب ولا
يأمنه الأبعد. يريدأنّهأسرفيالـكفرمرّةوفيالإسلاممرّة.وأمّاقوله ⟩دلّ
علىقومهالسيف⟨فأرادبهحديثًا كانللأشعثمعخالدبنالوليدباليمامةغرّ
فيهقومهومكربهمحتّىأوقعخالدبهموكانقومه بعد ذلك يسمّونه عُرف النار وهو ٱسم
للغادر عندهم. 1.20ومن خطبة له عليه السلام فإنّكم لو عاينتم ما قد عاين من
مات منكم لجزعتم ووهلتم وسمعتم وأطعتم ولـكن محجوب عنكمماعاينواوقريبماي ُ
طرحالحجابولقدب ُ صّرتمإنأبصرتموأسمعتمإنسمعتموهديتم إن ٱهتديتم. بحقّ أقول
لـكم لقد جاهرتكم العبر وزجرتم بما فيه مزدجر وما يبلّغ عن الله بعد رسل
السماء إلّا البشر. 1.21ومن خطبة له عليه السلام فإنّ الغاية أمامكم وإنّ
وراءكم الساعة تحدو .مكُرخآ مكـلّوأب رظتنُ ي امّنإف اوقحلت اوفّفخت مك
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
137 1.19 From words ʿAlī spoke to al-Ashʿath ibn Qays while orating on
the pulpit of Kufa. Ashʿath objected to something in ʿAlī's speech,
interjecting, "Commander of the Faith- ful, this point goes against you,
it doesn't count in your favor," and ʿAlī looked at him and exclaimed:1
What do you know about what goes against me or counts in my favor? God's
curse upon you---weaver, son of a weaver,2 hypocrite, son of an
infidel---and the curse of all who curse! By God, unbelief captured you
once, and Islam another time, and on neither occasion did your wealth or
ancestry serve as ran- som! If a man lifts the sword against his own
tribe and brings death to them, he deserves to be hated by kin and
feared by strangers. Raḍī: ʿAlī means that Ashʿath was taken captive
once as an unbeliever and once as a Muslim. Regarding his words, "lifts
the sword against his own tribe," he is alluding to a conversation
between Ashʿath and Khālid ibn al-Walīd in Yamāmah, in which Ashʿath
deceived his tribe and plotted against them, leading to Khālid's attack
and defeat of them. After this incident, Ashʿath's kinsfolk named him
"Cockscomb-of-the-Fire," a name they used for traitors. 1.20 From an
oration by ʿAlī: If you saw what the dead see, you would be stricken
with grief and fear, and would listen and obey. What they see is veiled
from you, but soon the veil will be cast aside. The fact is, you have
been given the capacity to see if you would but look, to hear if you
would but listen, to be guided if you would but follow! I say this to
you in truth: the world's deathly lessons have called out to you and
given you harsh warning. After God's messengers who descend from the
sky, who else but humans convey his message? 1.21 From an oration by
ʿAlī:3 The end is before you and the dreaded hour drives your caravan to
the water- hole. Lighten your burden and catch up, for those who have
gone ahead await those who remain behind. 1 After the Battle of Nahrawān
in 38/658; ʿAlī spoke of the arbitration, and Ashʿath sided with the
Kharijite position. Ḥ1:296. 2 This is a generic insult about weaving as
a lowly trade, and not a remark about Ashʿath's or his father's actual
trade.The commentators explain that ʿAlī is (1) using Ashʿath's own
worldly cri- teria to denigrate him (Ḥ1:296--297; R 184--185), or (2)
alluding to the assumption that weavers are not astute about affairs of
war and government (B 193). 3 Excerpt from §1.165, from the early part
of ʿAlī's caliphate in Medina in 35/656, perhaps his first oration
(Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:436). "Your burden" is explained as sin. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 138 Text and
Translation وأقول إنّ هذا الكلام لو وزن بعد كلام الله سبحانه وكلام رسول
الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بكلّ كلام لمال به راجحًا وبرّز عليه سابقًا. فأمّا
قوله عليه السلام ⟩تخففّوا تلحقوا⟨فما سمع كلام أقلّ منه مسموعًا ولا أكثر
محصولًا وما أبعد غورها من كلمة وأنقع نطفتها من حكمة. وقد نبّهنا في كتاب
الخصائص على عظم قدرها وشرف جوهرها. 1.22ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ألا وإنّ
الشيطان قد ذمر حزبه وٱستجلب جلبه ليعود الجور إلى أوطانه ويرجع الباطل ا ً
ّقح نوبلطيل مهّنإو اًفصن مهنيبو ينيب اولعج الو اً ركنم ّيلع اوركنأ ام هللاو
.هباصن ىلإ تركوه ودمًا هم سفكوه. فإن كنت شريكهم فيه فإنّ لهم لنصيبهم منه
ولئن كانوا ولوه تمطف دق ا ً ّمُأ نوعضتري .مهسفنأ ىلعل مهتّجح مظعأ ّنإو
مهدنع اّلإ ةعبتلا امف ينود ويحيون بدعة قد أميتت يا خيبة الداعي من دعا
وإلى ما أجيب وإن ّ ي لراضٍ بحجّة الله . ّقحلل اًرصانو لطابلا نم اً يفاش هب
ىفكو فيسلا ّدح مهتيطعأ اوبأ نإف مهيف هملعو مهيلع ومن العجب بعثتهم إليّ أن
أبرز للطعان وأن أصبر للجلاد هبلتهم الهبول لقد كنت وما أهدّد بالحرب ولا
أرهّب بالضرب وإن ّ ي لعلى يقين من رب ّ ي وغير شبهة من ديني.١ 1.23ومن خطبة
له عليه السلام ١ش،م،ھ،ونسخةفيي:كذا.أصلي،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩أمري⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
139 Raḍī: If these words were weighed against any other, barring the
words of God and the words of his Messenger, they would outweigh and
outstrip them all. Regarding ʿAlī's statement, "Lighten your burden and
catch up," no pithier or weightier words have ever been heard. How deep
the meaning of this maxim, how pure its font of wisdom! I have further
discussed its tremendous value and noble essence in The Book of Special
Attributes (Kitāb al-Khaṣāʾiṣ).1 1.22 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 Hear me!
Satan has roared to his followers and herded his camels in order to
returnoppressiontoitshomelandandrestoreeviltoitsroost.ByGod,theyhave no
cause to fault me or seek redress. Rather, they demand from me a right
they abandoned and vengeance for blood they spilt. If I had been their
partner in thisaffair,theywouldstillhavetheirshareof culpability.Butif
theyhaveunder- taken it on their own---which they have, without
me---then they keep all the blame and their main allegation rebounds to
them. In truth, they suckle at the breast of a woman who has weaned her
young,3 and resurrect a heresy that has been put to death. Losers, every
one of them, the issuers of this call! Who is it,
pray,whocalls,andtowhatpurposedotheyexpectmetoanswer?Iamsatisfied with
God's proof against them and his knowledge of their deeds! If they
persist, I will consign them to my blade---that will cure wrong and
instate right! Is it not strange that they challenge me to face their
spears and threaten me with sharpened swords? May their mothers mourn! I
have never been intimidated by threats of battle or panicked by an
impending attack. I have ever trusted my Lord and never doubted my
faith. 1.23 From an oration by ʿAlī:4 1 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ, 112. 2 In the
lead-up to the Battle of the Camel in Basra in 36/656: After ʿAlī's
emissaries returned from speaking with Ṭalḥah, Zubayr, and ʿĀʾishah and
informed him that they were adamant about confronting him on the
battlefield (R 1:188; B 198; Ḥ305--306). According to a minority
opinion, the text refers to Muʿāwiyah (R 1:188--189). See similar lines
in §1.10 and §1.135. The penultimate line of this oration is similar to
the first line of §1.172. 3 I.e., they suckle a woman who has no more
milk, a metaphor for the emptiness of their claim. 4 Various contexts
are given for this oration: (1) Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 228--229) transcribes
the first paragraph as ʿAlī's answer in an oration in the Basra mosque a
few days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656; part of the same
oration and answers are (in this order in ibid., 221--233): §1.103.1,
§1.154.2, §3.26, §3.354.2, §1.170.4, §1.23, §1.208, §1.154.4. (2)
Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:207) transcribes it as part of an oration in which
ʿAlī preceded these lines by reciting the Qurʾanic verse, «Indeed, it is
I who brings the dead to life. I write down all that they have brought
forth and note all their deeds. All things I have encompassed in a clear
Imam» (Qurʾan,Yāsīn 36:12). (3) Minqarī (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 10) transcribes
the second paragraph, the line of prayer, as part of ʿAlī's habitual
Friday sermon in Kufa and Medina. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 140 Text and
Translation أمّا بعد. فإنّ الأمر ينزل من السماء إلى الأرض كقطر المطر إلى
كلّ نفس بما قسّم لها من زيادة أو نقصان. فإذا رأى أحد كم لأخيه غفيرة في أهل
أو مال أو نفس فلا تكوننّ له فتنة. فإنّ المرء المسلم ما لم يغش دناءة تظهر
فيخشع لها إذا ذ كرت وتغرى بها
لئامالناسكانكالفالجالياسرالذيينتظرأوّلفوزةمنقداحهتوجبلهالمغنمويرفع
عنهبهاالمغرم.و كذلكالمرءالمسلمالبريءمنالخيانةينتظرمناللهإحدىالحسنيينإمّا
داعي الله فما عند الله خير له وإمّا رزق الله فإذا هو ذو أهل ومال ومعه
دينه وحسبه. إنّ المال والبنين حرث الدنيا والعمل الصالح حرث الآخرة وقد
يجمعهما الله لأقوام. فٱحذروا من الله ما حذّر كم من نفسه وٱخشوه خشية ليست
بتعذير وٱعملوا في غير رياء ولا سمعة فإنّه من يعمل لغير الله يكله الله إلى
من عمل له. نسأل الله منازل الشهداء ومعايشة السعداء ومرافقة الأنبياء.
أيّها الناس إنّه لا يستغني الرجل وإن كان ذا مال عن عشيرته ودفاعهم عنه
بأيديهم وألسنتهم وهم أعظم الناس حيطة من ورائه وألم ّ هم لشعثه وأعطفهم
عليه عند نازلة إذا نزلت به ولسان الصدق يجعله الله للمرء في الناس خير له
من المال يورّثه غيره. منها ألا لا يعدلنّ أحد كم عن القرابة يرى بها الخصاصة
أن يسدّها بالذي لا يزيده إن أمسكه ولا ينقصه إن أهلـكه ومن يقبض يده عن
عشيرته فإنّما تقبض منه عنهم يد واحدة وتقبض منهم عنه أيدٍ كثيرة. ومن تلن
حاشيته يستدم من قومه المودّة. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
141 God's command descends from the sky to the earth like raindrops,
bringing to each soul what is decreed for it, be it plenty or dearth.
Don't be envious if you see your brother in possession of family,
health, and wealth. As long as a Muslim does not commit an outrage that
would shame him if disclosed and embolden the rabble, he is like the
adventurer whose first drawn arrow wins him the prize and pays off his
debts.1 Similarly, a Muslim who is innocent of treachery awaits one of
two beautiful outcomes:2 either he will receive God's call---and reward
in God's presence is the best blessing anyone can obtain--- or God's
sustenance will come to him in this world, so he will have family and
wealth, while also keeping his faith and character. Wealth and children
are the harvest of this world, while good deeds are the harvest of the
hereafter,3 and God may certainly bless a man with both. Beware the
punishment that God has warned you of and do not fall short in fearing
him. Perform deeds with sincerity, not to show off or gather praise, for
whoever performs deeds for any
reasonotherthantopleaseGodwillbehandedovertothepersonheperformed them
for. We beseech God to grant us the station of the martyrs, the compan-
ionship of the blissful, and the fellowship of the prophets. People!
Even the wealthy man needs his kin, and he needs them to defend him with
hand and tongue. Their backing is his best protection, and their support
gives strength to his shaky affairs. When a calamity hits him, they show
him the most com- passion. A true tongue granted by God to a man among
his people brings him more benefit than the wealth he leaves for
another.4 From the same oration: Harken to my words! Let none of you
turn away from an impoverished relative. Your wealth will not increase
if you withhold your largesse or decrease if you provide. The man who is
close-fisted with kin will find that his closed fist will be countered
with many closed fists. The man who possesses gentleness will keep his
people's affection.5 1 The metaphor is based on the pre-Islamic practice
of drawing arrows (called maysir) to deter- mine division of a
slaughtered camel's meat. The man who draws the tallest arrow wins the
choicest part. B 203; R 1:193--194. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Tawbah 9:52.
3 Reference to Qurʾan, Shūrā 42:20. 4 Reference to Qurʾan, Maryam 19:50,
Shuʿarāʾ 26:84. "A true tongue" (lisān ṣidq) is the superior reputation
he leaves behind, or the true teachings he imparts that continue to
benefit after his death. B 205; R 1:195; Asad, The Message of the
Qurʾān, commentary on Qurʾan, Maryam 19:50. 5 "Who possesses
gentleness"---lit. "whose intestines are soft." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 142 Text
and Translation
وماأحسنالمعنىالذيأرادهعليهالسلامبقوله⟩ومنيقبضيدهعنعشيرته⟨إلىتمامالكلام
فإنّ الممسك خيره عن عشيرته إنّما يمسك نفع يد واحدة فإذا ٱحتاج إلى نصرتهم
وٱضطرّإلى مرافدتهم قعدوا عن نصره وتثاقلوا عن صوته فمنع ترافد الأيدي
الـكثيرة وتناهض الأقدام الجم ّ ة. 1.24ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ولعمري ما
عليّ من قتال من خالف الحقّ وخابط الغيّ من إدهان ولا إيهان. فٱتّقوا الله عباد
الله وفرّوا إلى لله من الله وٱمضوا في الذي نهجه لـكم وقوموا بما عصبه بكم
فعَلِيٌّ ضامن لفُلْجكم آجل ً ا وإن لم تمنحوه عاجل ً ا.
1.25ومنخطبةلهعليهالسلاموقدتواترتعليهالأخباربٱستيلاءأصحابمعاويةعلىالبلاد
ْ سُ ب اهيلع بلغ اّ مل نارمن نب ديعسو سابعلا نب هللا ديبع امهو نميلا ىلع
هالماع هيلع مدقو ر بن أبي لاقو يأرلا يف هل مهتفلاخمو داهجلا نع هباحصأ
لقاثتب اً رجض ربنملا ىلإ مالسلا هيلع ماقف ةأطرَأ عليه السلام ما هي إلّا
الـكوفة أقبضها وأبسطها إن لم تكوني إلّا أنت تهب ّ أعاصيرك فقبّحك الله.
وتمثّل١ ُ رْمَع اَيِرْيَ ـخْلا َكيِ بَأُ رْمَعَ ل ْيِنَ ّن ِإ و ٰ لَ ع ـَ ن ِإْلا اَذ ْنِم
ٍرَضَو ى ٖليِ لَ قِءاـ ثمّقال عليه السلام أنبئت بسرًا قد ٱطّلع اليمن وإن ّ ي
والله لأظنّ هؤلاء القوم سي ُ دالون منكم بٱجتماعهم على باطلهم وتفرّقكم عن
حقّكم وبمعصيتكم إمامكم في الحقّ وطاعتهم إمامهم في الباطل وبأدائهم الأمانة
إلى صاحبهم وخيانتكم وبصلاحهم في بلادهم وإفساد كم. فلو ٱئتمنت أحد كم على
قعب لخشيت أن يذهب بعلاقته. الّلهمّ إن ّ ي قد مللتهم وملّوني وسئمتهم
١البحر:الطويل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
143 Raḍī:Whatabeautifulmotif
ʿAlīexpoundedwhenhesaid,"Themanwhoisclose-fisted with kin," and so on,
till the end of the piece. For the man who withholds generosity from kin
withholds the benefit he can bestow with one hand, whereas when he needs
their aid and craves their support, they will hesitate to help him and
be slow to answer his call, denying him the support of many hands and a
host of marching feet. 1.24 From an oration by ʿAlī: By my life, no
softness or weakness shall hold me back from fighting those who
challenge the truth and follow the way of error. Servants of God, fear
God, and flee to God's reward from God's wrath.1 Walk the path that he
paved for you, fulfill the duties to which he bound you, and ʿAlī
guarantees your success in the hereafter, even if victory is not granted
you in the here and now. 1.25 From an oration by ʿAlī. Widespread
reports reached ʿAlī that Muʿāwiyah's com- manders had occupied his
territories. When Busr ibn Abī Arṭāt seized Yemen, ʿAlī's governors,
ʿUbaydallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās and Saʿīd ibn Nimrān, fled and returned to
Kufa. Angered by his followers' apathy in rising to fight and their
opposition to his com- mands, ʿAlī ascended the pulpit and exclaimed:2 I
have only you, Kufa, to hold or relinquish; only you, with your dry
winds that raise pillars of dust! May God render you foul! He then
recited a testimonial verse: By the life of your virtuous father, I
swear: My pot has nothing but smudges of fat.3 He continued: I am
informed that Busr has ascended the Yemeni highlands. By God, I fear
this group will vanquish you, for they are united in their false claim,
while you, despite your truth, are divided. You disobey your leader in
his call to the truth, while they obey theirs in his call to falsehood.
They are loyal to their mas- ter, while you are treacherous. Their lands
adhere to a proper state of affairs, while you are corrupt and
dishonest---if I entrusted one of you with a wooden cup, he would make
off with its palm-fronded handle! God, I am tired of these 1 Lit. "Flee
to God from God." I have added the words "reward" and "wrath" for
clarity. 2 One of ʿAlī's final orations, delivered in Kufa in 40/660.
Ḥ1:348. See details of Busr's attack in Ḥ2:3--18; B 208. 3 The
commenters explain the verse but do not identify the poet and I have not
found an iden- tification elsewhere. B 210; R 1:201. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 144 Text
and Translation ثِم ّمهلّلا .يّنم ا ً ّرش يب مهلدبأو مهنم اًريخ مهب ينلدبأف
ينومئسو ْ قلوبهم كما يماث الملح في الماء. أما والله لوددت أنّ لي بكم ألف
فارس من بني فراس بن غَنَم١ ِ لاَ نُه تْوَعَدْوَ ل َك َ أَتَاكَمِنْه ُ مْ رِجَـ ـالٌ مِثْـ ـَ
يِمْرَأ ُلـ ِ مَ حْلا ِةـ يمٖ ثمّنزل من المنبر عليه السلام. قلت أنا
و⟩الأرمية⟨جمع ⟩رميّ⟨وهو السحاب. و⟩الحميم⟨في هذا الموضع وقت الصيف. وإنّما
خص ّ الشاعرسحابالصيفبالذ نوكيامّنإو.هيفءامالهّنألاً فوفخعرسأواًلوفج
ّدشأهّنألرك السحاب ثقيل السير لٱمتلائه بالماء وذلك لا يكون في الأكثر إلّا
في أزمان الشتاء. وإنّما أراد الشاعر وصفهم بالسرعة إذا دعوا والإغاثة إذا
ٱستغيثوا. والدليل على ذلك قوله ⟩هنالك لو دعوت أتاك منهم⟨. 1.26ومن خطبة
له عليه السلام 1.26.1إنّ الله بعث محمّدًا صل ّ رشعم متنأو ليزنتلا ىلع اً
نيمأو نيملاعلل اًريذن هلآو هيلع هللا ى العرب على شرّدين وفي شرّدار مُنيخون
بين حجارة خشن وحيّات صمّ تشربون الـكدر وتأكلون الجشب وتسفكون دماءكم
وتقطعون أرحامكم الأصنام فيكم منصوبة والآثام بكم معصوبة. 1.26.2منها
فنظرتفإذاليسليمعينإلّاأهلبيتيفضننتبهمعنالموتوأغضيتعلىالقذى وشربت على
الشجى وصبرت على أخذ الـكظم وعلى أمرّ من طعم العلقم . ١البحر:السريع.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
145 people, and they are tired of me. I am weary of them, and they are
weary of me. So give me better and give them worse. Crush their hearts
like salt dissolving in water. By God, would that I had a thousand
tribesmen from Firās ibn Ghanam instead of the lot of you! When you call
out Their men rush to you Like the hot summer cloud.1 Then he descended
from the pulpit. Raḍī: Armiyah, pl. ramī, is a cloud. Ḥamīm here means
the heat of summer. The poet singles out summer clouds because they are
blown along more swiftly and are light and fast moving. Clouds move
heavily when they are full of water, and this is true mostly in winter.
The poet wished to describe the warriors as swift to answer the call and
as assisting as soon as they are asked. My interpretation is endorsed by
his line, ⟨When you call out / Their men rush to you.⟩ 1.26 From an
oration by ʿAlī:2 1.26.1 God sent Muḥammad as a warner to all peoples
and a trustee of his rev- elation at a time when you Arabs followed a
foul religion and lived in a foul abode: You unloaded your camels
between rough boulders and deadly adders, drank muddy water, ate coarse
food, randomly spilt blood, and recklessly sev- ered ties of kinship.
Idols were ensconced in your lands, and sins were bound to your necks.
1.26.2 From the same oration:3
Ilookedaroundme,andwhenIsawthatmyfamilywasmyonlysupport,Ichose
tosavethemfromcertaindeath.ButIblinkeddowndust,chokedwhenIdrank,
suffered harsh throttling, and endured a state more bitter than
colocynth. 1 The verse is by the pre-Islamic poet Abū Jundub al-Hudhalī
al-Mashʾūm, and is cited in Sukkarī, SharḥAshʿār al-Hudhaliyyīn, 363;
Ibn Manẓūr, Lisān, s.v. "R-M-Y"; Azharī, Tahdhīb, s.v. "R-M-Y." Ḥ1:348;
R 1:203--204. 2 ʿAlī delivered this oration in Kufa in 38/658 after ʿAmr
ibn al-ʿĀṣhad conquered Egypt for Muʿāwiyah and killed ʿAlī's ward and
governor, Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr. Details in Ḥ2:61-- 73. 3 This section
refers to the pledge of allegiance to Abū Bakr after the Prophet's
death. Details in Ḥ2:21--60. Similar lines in §1.215.3. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 146 Text and
Translation 1.26.3منها .عاتبملا ةنامأ تيزخو عيابملا دي ترفظ الف اً نمث
ةعيبلا ىلع هيتؤي نأ طرش ىّتح عيابي ملو فخذوا للحرب أهبتها وأعدّوا لها
عدّتها فقد شب ّ لظاها وعلا سناها. 1.27ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أمّا بعد.
فإنّ الجهاد باب من أبواب الجنّة فتحه الله لخاصّة أوليائه وهو لباس التقوى
ودرع الله الحصينة وجُنّته الوثيقة فمن تر كه ألبسه الله ثوب الذلّ وشمله
البلاء ودُيّث بالصغار والقماء وضرب على قلبه بالإسهاب١ وأديل الحقّ منه
بتضييع الجهاد وسِيم الخسف ومُنع النصف. ألا وإن ّ ي قد دعوتكم إلى حرب هؤلاء
القوم ليل ً ا ً ّرسو اًراهنو ا وإعلانًا وقلت لـكم ٱغزوهم قبل أن يغزوْكم
فوالله ما غزي قوم قط ّ في عقر دارهم إلّا ذل ّ وا فتواكلتم وتخاذلتم حتّى
شُنّت عليكم الغارات ومُلـكت عليكم الأوطان. هذا أخو غامد قد وردت خيله
الأنبار وقد قتل حسّان بن حسّان البكري ّ وأزال خيلـكم عن مسالحها. ولقد
بلغني أنّ الرجل منهم كان يدخل على المرأة المسلمة والأخرى المعاهدةفينتزعح
ماحرتسالاوعاجرتسالاباّلإهنمعنتمتاماهثاعِرواهدئالقواهبْلُ قواهلْج ِ ثمّٱنصرفوا
وافرين ما نال رجل ً تام اً ملسمً أرمٱ ّنأ ولف .مد مهل قيرأ الو مْلَك مهنم ا
تيمي هللاو اً بجع اً بجع ايف .اًريدج يدنع هب ناك لب اًمولم هب ناك ام اًفسأ
اذه دعب نم القلب ويجلب الهمّ من ٱجتماع هؤلاء القوم على باطلهم وتفرّقكم عن
حقّكم فقبحًا لـكم َ زغُ تونوريغتالومكيلعراغيىمرياًضرغمترصدقنيحاًحرتو ونولاتغز
ُ ونويعصىالله ١م،ي،ھ:كذا.ش: ⟩بالأسداد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 147 1.26.3 From the same oration:1 ʿAmr pledged allegiance
to Muʿāwiyah only after he had stipulated a price--- may the pledger's
hand stay empty, and the pledgee's charge be betrayed! Men, prepare for
battle and ready your weapons! The fires of war have been stoked and
their blaze has flared high. 1.27 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 Jihad is a
door to heaven that God has opened for his special devotees. It is
piety's robe,3 God's own protective armor, and his trusty shield. Those
who spurn it will be clothed in dishonor, engulfed by calamities, and
whipped into compliance.Chaoswilldestroytheirminds.If
theyforsakejihad,righteousness will cease, shame will consume, and
justice will be denied. Listen to me! Day and night, in private and in
public, I urged you to fight this group. I exhorted you to attack them
before they attacked you, for, by God, a group attacked in its heartland
is sure to be routed! But you looked at one another and aban- doned your
fellows until you were raided, time and again, and your homelands were
overrun. So now the Ghāmidī man's horses have raided Anbar. He has
killed Ḥassān ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī and driven your cavalry from their
fortifi- cations. I have heard that their men forced their way into
homes and ripped anklets, bracelets, necklaces, and earrings from our
women, Muslim and non- Muslim,4 who had no way to save themselves except
to beg for mercy, and to cry out that all must return to God.5 The
horsemen then left unscathed, not a single individual injured, not a
drop of their blood spilt. Who would blame a Muslim if, after this, he
were to die in shame? I would say that his death is fully justified! O
how incomprehensible your behavior! I am baffled at how that group
unites behind their false claim, while you squabble among yourselves and
refuse to fight for your right. It stabs my heart and gives me deep
anguish. May you feel squalor and grief! You sit as a target for enemy
arrows, you are 1 I havereplacedthe pronounsinthesection
withnames,takenfrom the commentaries,which also provide details of
ʿAmr's arrangement with Muʿāwiyah. Ḥ2:61--73; B 214; R 1:204--205. 2
ʿAlī delivered this oration in the wake of an attack on Anbar in 39/660
by a cavalry troop led by Muʿāwiyah's commander Sufyān ibn ʿAwf
al-Ghāmidī, who killed ʿAlī's governor Ḥassān ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī and
pillaged the town. In response to ʿAlī's oration, two men came up to him
to offer support; ʿAlī prayed for them, and sighed, "But what can two
men do?" (§3.254). R 1:214--215; B 215--216; Ḥ2:75--76, 85--90. 3
Reference to Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:26. 4 Lit. muʿāhadah, "a woman protected by
a covenant," referring to Christians and Jews. 5 Reference to Qurʾan,
Baqarah 2:156: «We belong to God, and to him we return» a verse typi-
cally voiced in times of great distress. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 148 Text
and Translation وترضون. فإذا أمرتكم بالسير إليهم في أيّام الحرّقلتم هذه
حَمارّة القَيظ أمهلنا يسبّخ عنّا ّلك دربلا اّنع ١خلسني انلهمأّرُقلا ةّرابَص هذه
متلق ءاتشلا يف مهيلإ ريسلاب مكترمأ اذإوّرَ حلا هذا فرارًا من الحرّوالقرّفإذا
كنتم من الحرّوالقرّتفرّون فأنتم والله من السيف أفرّ. يا أشباه الرجال ولا
رجال حلوم الأطفال وعقول ربّات الحِجال. لوددت أن ّ ي لم أر كم ولم متنحشو
اًحيق يبلق متألم دقل هللا مكـلتاق ٢.ا ً ّمذ تبقعأو اًمدن تّرج هللاو ةفرعم
مكفرعأ نالذخلاو نايصعلاب ييأر ّيلع متدسفأو اًسافنأ مامْه َ ّتلا بَغُ ن
ينومتعّرجو اًظيغ يردص حتّىقالتقريشإنّ
ٱبنأبيطالبرجلشجاعولـكنلاعلملهبالحربللهأبوهموهل أحد منهم أشدّ لها مِراسًا
وأقدم فيها مقامًا منّي. لقد نهضت فيها وما بلغت العشرين وها أنا ذا قد ذرّفت
على الستّين. ولـكنّه لا رأي لمن لا يطاع. 1.28ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أمّا
بعد. فإنّ الدنيا قد أدبرت وآذنت بوداع وإنّ الآخرة قد أقبلت وأشرفت بٱطّلاع
ألا وإنّ اليوم الم ِ هتئيطخ نم بئات الفأ .رانلا ةياغلاو ةّنجلا ةقْب ُ ّسلاو
قابِّسلا اًدغو رامض قبل منيّته ألا عامل لنفسه قبل يوم بؤسه. ألا وإنّكم في
أيّام أمل من ورائه أجل فمن عمل في أيّام أمله قبل حضور أجله نفعه عمله ولم
يضرره أجله ومن قصّر في أيّام أمله قبل حضور أجله فقد خسر عمله وضرّه أجله ألا
فٱعملوا في الرغبةكما تعملون في الرهبة ألا وإن ّ ي لم أر كالجنّة نام
طالبها ولا كالنار نام هاربها ألا وإنّه من لا ينفعه الحقّ يضرره الباطل ومن
لا يستقم به الهدى يجرّبه الضلال إلى الردى ألا وإنّكم قد أُمرتم بالظعن ١ش،
ي، ھ، ومصحّحة في م: كذا. أصل م: ⟩يسبّخ⟨. ٢م، ي، ھ: كذا. ش، ونسخة في ھ:
⟩سدمًا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
149 raided but do not raid, you are attacked but do not attack, God is
disobeyed and you are content. Earlier, when I commanded you to mobilize
in the days of heat, you replied, "It is the swelter of
midsummer---spare us until the heat lessens." When I commanded you to
mobilize in wintertime, you replied, "It is the freeze of
midwinter---spare us until the cold departs." All this, just to avoid
heatandcold!ByGod,if youfleethusfromheatandcold,youwillfleeingreater
panic from the sword! Semblances of men, not men, with minds of children
and wits of cloistered women! I wish I had never seen you! I wish I had
never known you! By God, knowing you has brought me only regret, only
defamation! May God attack you! You have filled my heart with pus and
weighted my breast with ire. With every breath I take, you have poured
me draughts of sorrow. You have ruined my strategy with your
disobedience and opposition, such that the Quraysh tribesmen say, "Abū
Ṭālib's son may be a brave man, but he has no knowledge of war." Good
God!1 Is there anyone more familiar with its harsh- ness, or who
experienced it at a younger age? I knew war intimately before I turned
twenty, and now I am past sixty! But there can be no strategy without
obedience. 1.28 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 The world has shown its back
and proclaimed its farewell. The hereafter has
approachedandannounceditsarrival.Harkmywords!Todayisthedayof train- ing
and tomorrow the race: its goal is paradise, or its end hellfire. Will
you not repent of your sins before your death?Will you not perform deeds
for your soul before your day of adversity? Hark my words! These are
your days of hope and coming up right behind them is death. Those who
perform deeds during their days of hope, before the arrival of death,
will benefit from their days of hope, and death will cause no harm.
Those who fall short in performing deeds dur- ing their days of hope,
before the arrival of death, will have squandered their days of hope,
and death will cause them harm. Hark my words! Perform deeds from hope,
just as you perform them from fear. Hark my words! I have never seen any
who seek paradise or flee hellfire in heedless slumber. Hark my words!
Those not helped by right are harmed by wrong. Those not placed on the
path 1 Lit. "To God, purely, is attributable (the excellence of) their
father" (lillāhi abūhum). It is an expression of wonder, praise, or
incredulity. Lane, Lexicon, s.v. "A-B-W." 2 This is part of §1.45, which
begins "I praise God, never uncertain of his mercy." B 221. §1.28 is
also cited in a slightly different recension as §1.52. All these are
parts of a sermon delivered on ʿĪd al-Fiṭr or ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā, presumably in
Kufa during ʿAlī's caliphate. Details in note at §1.45. (Some lines are
also similar in §1.42). On this oration, see Qutbuddin, "A Sermon on
Piety by Imam ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib: How the Rhythm of the Classical Arabic
Oration Tacitly Persuaded." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 150 Text and
Translation ودُللتمعلىالزادوإنّ
أخوفماأخافعليكمٱتّباعالهوىوطولالأملتزوّدوافيالدنيا من الدنيا ما تحوزون به
أنفسكم غدًا. وأقول إنّه لو كان كلام يأخذ بالأعناق إلى الزهد في الدنيا
ويضطرّإلى عمل الآخرة لكان هذا الكلام وكفى به قاطعًا لعلائق الآمال وقادحًا
زناد الاتّعاظ والازدجار. ومن أعجبه قوله عليه السلام ⟩ألا وإنّ المضمار
اليوم وغدًا السباق والسبقة الجنّة والغاية النار⟨فإنّ فيه مع فخامة هيلع هلوق
وهو اًفيطل ىنعمو اً بيجع ا ً ّرس هيبشتلا عقاوو ليثمتلا قداصو ىنعملا ردق
مظعو ظفللا السلام
⟩والسبقةالجنّةوالغايةالنار⟨فخالفبيناللفظينلٱختلافالمعنيينولميقل ⟩والسبقة
النار⟨كماقال⟩والسبقةالجنّة⟨لأنّ الاستباقإنّمايكونإلىأمرمحبوبوغرضمطلوبوهذه
صفة الجنّة وليس هذا المعنى موجودًا في النار نعوذ بالله منها فلم يجز أن
يقول ⟩والسبقة النار⟨ بل قال ⟩والغاية النار⟨لأنّ الغاية قد ينتهي إليها من
لا يسرّه الانتهاء ومن يسرّه ذلك فصلح أن يعبّر بها عن الأمرين معًا فهي في هذا
الموضع كالمصير والمآل قال الله عزّ وجلّ ﴿ق ُ ْاوُعَ ّتَ مَ ت ْل َ ل ِإ ْمُكَريِصَم
َ ّنِإَ ف كلذلّمأتف.⟨رانلاىلإمكتقبس ّنإف⟩ لاقينأعضوملااذهيفزوجيالو﴾ِراَ ّنلٱى
فباطنه عجيب وغوره بعيد و كذلك أكثر كلامه عليه السلام. 1.29ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام أيّها الناس المجتمعة أبدانهم المختلفة أهواؤهم كلامكم يوهي
الصمّ الصلاب وفعلـكم يطمع فيكم الأعداء تقولون في المجالس كَيْت َ وكَيْت َ
فإذا جاء القتال قلتم حِيدِي حَيادِ. ما عزّت دعوة من دعاكم ولا ٱستراح قلب من
قاساكم أعاليل بأضاليل دفاع يأ ّدِجلاب اّلإ ّقحلا كردي الو ليلذلا ميضلا
عنمي ال .لوطملا ني َ ّدلا يذ ّ دار بعد دار كم تمنعون ومع أي ّ إمام بعدي
تقاتلون المغرور والله من غررتموه ومن فاز بكم فاز بالسهم الأخيب ومن رمى
بكم فقد رمى بأَفْوَقِ ناصل أصبحت والله لا أصدّق قولـكم ولا al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
151 by guidance are dragged by error to perdition. Hark my words! You
have been commanded to journey and directed to provision. What I fear
most for you is the pursuit of desire and lengthy yearnings. Take
provisions in this world, from this world, to nourish your souls
tomorrow. Raḍī: If ever words grabbed you by the neck and compelled you
to renounce the world and perform deeds for the hereafter, it would be
these words, which cut the cords of false hope and ignite the flint of
counsel and warning. Among their most wondrous lines are, "Today is the
day of training and tomorrow the race: its goal is paradise, or its end
hellfire." For in addition to majestic vocabulary, exalted themes, clear
analogies, and effective metaphors, they enfold a wondrous secret and
sublime significance in the line, "its goal (subqah) is paradise, or its
end (ghāyah) hellfire." Here, ʿAlī differentiates between the two words
because they have different significations. He does not say "its goal is
hellfire" as he says "its goal is paradise" because one races towards
something one wants, to a prize one hopes to win, and that is the
description of paradise. But this significance does not apply to
hellfire---may God protect us from it!---so it would be impermissible to
say, "its goal is hellfire." Rather, ʿAlī says, "its end is hellfire,"
because an end is reached by those who are not pleased to reach it as
well as by those who are pleased to reach it; it conveys both
situations. In the context of this sermon, the word "end" indicates the
last stop, the place of final return, as in God's words, «Say:Take plea-
sure if you wish! Your last stop is hellfire.»1 It would be
impermissible to say here, "your goal is hellfire." Reflect on ʿAlī's
words, for the signification of this saying is wondrous, its well deep.
And this is true for the entirety of ʿAlī's speech. 1.29 From an oration
by ʿAlī:2 People! You are together in body but divided in aspiration.
Your words would shatter mighty rocks, but your actions embolden the
enemy. In your gather- ings you say this and that, but when battle
approaches, you yell, "Be gone! Get away!" A mission that depends on you
never succeeds. A heart that is subjected to you is never at ease.
Excuses and falsehoods! You keep asking for a delay, like debtors who
put off and refuse to pay! Men without honor cannot fight injus-
tice.Rightscannotbewonexceptthroughearnesteffort.Tellme---whichhome will
you defend when this one is taken? Under which leader will you fight
when I am gone? By God, whoever believes in you is deluded! Whoever wins
you as his share wins the losing arrow! Whoever has you in his bow
shoots a broken- 1 Qurʾan, Ibrāhīm 14:30. 2 ʿAlī delivered this oration
in Kufa, following a raid by Muʿāwiyah's commander al-Ḍaḥḥāk ibn Qays
al-Fihrī in 39/660 on pilgrims encamped at Thaʿlabiyyah. Ḥ2:113--117, B
225. Nuʿmān (Daʿāʾim, 1:391) identifies it as a Friday sermon. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 152 Text and
Translation أطمع في نصر كم ولا أوعد العدوّ بكم ما بالـكم ما دواؤ كم ما
طبّكم القوم رجال أمثالـكم أق َ وْلًا بغير علم وغفلة من غير ورع وطمعًا في غير
حقّ . 1.30من كلام له عليه السلام في معنى قتل عثمان لو أمرت به لـكنت قاتل
ً ا أو نهيت عنه لـكنت ناصرًا غير أنّ من نصره لا يستطيع أن يقول خذله من أنا
خير منه ومن خذله لا يستطيع أن يقول نصره من هو خير منّي. وأنا جامع لـكم
أمره ٱستأثر فأساء الأثرة وجزعتم فأسأتم الجزع ولله حكم واقع في المستأثر
والجازع. 1.31عوقو لبق ريبزلا ىلإ هللا همحر ساّبعلا نب هللا دبع ذفنأ اّ مل
مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو الحرب يوم الجمل يستفيئه إلى طاعته. قال له عليه
السلام لا تلقينّ طلحة فإنّك إن تلقه تجدهكالثور عاقصًا قرنه يركب الصعب ويقول
هو الذلول ولـكن ٱلق الزبير فإنّه ألين عريكة فقل له يقول لك ٱبن خالك
عرفتني بالحجاز وأنكرتني بالعراق فما عدا ممّا بدا. وهو عليه السلام أوّل من
سمعت منه هذه الكلمة أعني ⟩فما عدا ممّا بدا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 153 nocked arrow with a dull point!1 By God, I woke this
morning not trusting any- thing you say, not expecting your support, not
threatening the enemy with your strength. What is wrong with you? What
is your cure? What is your remedy? They are but men like you! So much
talk and no comprehension, so much rash- ness and no piety, so much
greed for things that don't belong to you! 1.30 From words ʿAlī spoke
about ʿUthmān's assassination:2 If I had commanded it, I would be a
killer. If I had forbidden it, I would be a supporter. In truth, the
supporter cannot claim that he is more righteous than the detractor,
while the detractor would not be correct in saying that the sup- porter
is more righteous than he is.3 Let me summarize the situation for you:
ʿUthmān misappropriated, and that was wrong. You responded with
violence, and that was also wrong. Both the one who misappropriated and
the one who responded with violence will face God's judgment. 1.31 From
words ʿAlī spoke just before the fighting began at the Battle of the
Camel, when he sent ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās to urge Zubayr to return to
the fold of obedience. ʿAlī said:4 Don't speak with Ṭalḥah, for you will
find him a bull with twisted horns, a man who rides a refractory beast
and swears it is docile. Speak instead with Zubayr, whose hump is
softer, and say to him:Your cousin ʿAlī says to you:You acknowl- edged
me in Medina and rejected me in Iraq---what turned you from what you
deemed good? Raḍī: ʿAlī was the first to use the expression, "What
turned you from what you deemed good?" (mā ʿadā mimmā badā). 1
"Broken-nocked," ( fūq, used here in the elative form, afwaq), is a
notch at the end of an arrow into which the bowstring fits. 2 On the
events leading up to ʿUthmān's killing in Medina in 35/656, see
Ḥ1:129--161. Raḍī tran- scribes this text among ʿAlī's orations, but Ibn
Ṭāwūs (Kashf, 174, 180) cites it as part of a lengthy epistle ʿAlī wrote
after Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr was killed in 38/658, which ʿAlī gave to
al-Aṣbagh ibn Nubātah et al., instructing them to have Ibn Abī Rāfiʿ
read it out every Friday in the Kufa mosque. The Sunni commentators are
at pains to point out that although ʿAlī did not pick up a sword to
defend ʿUthmān, he spoke out against his murder, even sending his sons
Ḥasan and Ḥusayn to guard ʿUthmān's door. Ḥ2:126; ʿA 98 n. 1. 3 "The
supporter" could be a reference to Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam, and "the
detractor" to ʿAbdal- lāh ibn Masʿūd. R 1:224. 4 Basra, 36/656. On
details of the conversation between ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās and Zubayr,
and related events at the Battle of the Camel, see Ḥ2:166--170. Zubayr
was the son of ʿAlī's paternal aunt, Ṣafiyyah bint ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 154 Text and
Translation 1.32ومن خطبة له عليه السلام١ دادزيو اً ئيسم نسحملا هيف ّدعي
٢ديدش نمزو دونع رهد يف انحبصأ دق اّنإ سانلا اهّيأ .انب ّلحت ىّتح ةعراق
فّوختن الو انلهج اّمع لأسن الو انملع امب عفتنن ال اً ّوتع هيف ملاظلا فالناس
على أربعة أصناف. منهم من لا يمنعه الفسادَفي الأرض إلّا مهانةُنفسه وكلالة
حدّه ونضيض وفره. ومنهم المصلت بسيفه والمعلن بسرّه٣ والمجلب بخيله ورَجْله قد
أشرط نفسه وأوبق دينه لحطام ينتهزه أو مِقنب يقوده أو منبر يفرعه. ولبئس
المتجر ةرخآلا لمعب ايندلا بلطي نممهنمو .اًضوع هللا دنعكل اّممو اً نمث كسفنل
ايندلا ىرتنأ ولا يطلب الآخرة بعمل الدنيا قد طامن من شخصه وقارب من خطوه
وشمّر من ثوبه وزخرف من نفسه للأمانة واتّخذ ستر الله ذريعة إلى المعصية.
ومنهم من أقعده عن طلب الملك ضؤولة نفسه وٱنقطاع سببه فقصرته الحال على
حاله فتحل ّ ى بٱسم القناعة وتزي ّ ن بلباس أهل الزهادة وليس من ذلك في
مراح ولا مغدى. وبقي رجال غض ّ أبصارهمذ
كرالمرجعوأراقدموعهمخوفالمحشر.فهمبينشريدنادٍّوخائفمقموع وساكت مكعوم وداعٍ
مخلص وثكلان موجَع قد أخملتهم التقيّة وشملتهم الذل ّ ة فهم في بحر أجاج
أفواههم ضامزة وقلوبهم قرحة قد وعظوا حتّى ملّوا وق ُ هروا حتّى ذل ّ اولتُ قو
او حتّىقلّوا.فلتكنالدنياأصغرفيأعينكممنحُثالةالقَر َ ناكنمباوظعّتٱومَلَ جلاةضارُ
قوظ قبلـكم قبل أن يتّعظ بكم من بعد كم وٱرفضوها ذميمة فإنّها قد رفضت من كان
أشغف بها منكم. وهذه الخطبة ربّما نسبها من لا علم له إلى معاوية وهي من
كلام أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام الذي لا شكّ فيه وأين الذهب من الرغام
والعذب من الأجاج وقد دلّ على ذلك الدليل ١تبدأمخطوطهنمنهنا.
٢م،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.ن،ونسخةفيم: ⟩كنود⟨. ٣م،ي،ونسخة فيھ:كذا.ن،وأصلھ:
⟩بشرّه⟨.ش:معًا. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
155 1.32 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 People! We live in a challenging age
and a difficult time, when the good are deemed evil, and oppressors grow
ever more brutal. We neither benefit from what we have learnt, nor ask
about what we don't know---we ignore calamities until they set up camp
in our homes. Men today fall into one of four categories: One is
prevented from spreading corruption on earth by the weakness of his
person, the dullness of his blade, and the sparseness of his wealth.
Another unsheathes his sword, announces his intention, and assembles
foot soldiers and cavalry, selling his soul and forfeiting his religion
to amass baubles, lead an army, or ascend a pulpit---what a terrible
transaction, when you deem the world an equitable price for your soul, a
fair exchange for heavenly reward! A third seeks worldly gain by
performing the deeds of the hereafter, rather than seeking the hereafter
by performing good deeds in this world; he appears calm in his person,
walks with slow steps, tucks up his garments, and presents himself as a
trustworthy man, taking advantage of the concealment offered by God's
veil to sin. A fourth is only prevented from seeking power by his own
ser- vility and lack of support---these are what keeps him in his place.
He wears the mark of contentment and dons the garment of renunciants,
but neither his haunts in the daytime nor his retreats in the night are
anything like theirs. Only a few men remain---their eyes are wet with
remembrance of the return to God, and their tears flow from fear of the
resurrection. One is a solitary fugitive, another is curbed by fear, a
third is shushed and muzzled, a fourth, sincere, prays, and a fifth is
bereaved and grieving. They are weakened by ter- ror and humiliated on
all sides; they drink from a bitter sea, tongues silenced,
heartswounded.Theygavecounseluntilexhausted,nowtheyarebeatendown; almost
all have been killed off, only a few remain. People, let this world be
smaller in your eyes than fibers of a spiny acacia pod, or fluffs of
wool float- ing off a pair of shears. Learn from the fate of those who
came before, let not those who come later have occasion to learn from
yours. Reject this world and
censureher,forshehasrejectedmanywhowerefarmoreenamoredof herthan you.
Raḍī: Some individuals who lack any knowledge attribute this oration to
Muʿāwiyah, when it is unquestionably the speech of the Commander of the
Faithful. Can one com- pare dirt to gold, or the bitter to the sweet?
Indeed, an experienced guide has shown 1 ʿAlī delivered this oration in
the Grand Mosque of Kufa, during his caliphate, 35--40/656--661, in the
presence of the community's leaders. Ibn Ṭalḥah, Maṭālib, 176. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 156 Text and
Translation الخِرّيت ونقده الناقد البصير عمرو بن بحر الجاحظ فإنّه ذ ١نُ ّ
يبتلاو نايبلا هباتك يف ةبطخلا هذه رك وذ
كرمننسبهاإلىمعاويةثمّتكلّممنبعدهابكلامفيمعناهاجملتهأنّهقالوهذاالكلامبكلام
عليّعليهالسلامأشبهوبمذهبهفيتصنيفالناسوفيالإخبارعمّاهمعليهمنالقهروالإذلال
ومن التقيّة والخوف أليق. ومتى وجدنا معاوية في حال من الأحوال يسلك في
كلامه مسلك الزهّاد ومذاهب العبّاد.
1.33ومنخطبةلهعليهالسلامعندمسيرهلقتالأهلالبصرة.قالعبداللهبنالعبّاسرضي الله
عنه دخلت على أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه بذي قار وهو يخصف نعله فقال لي
ما قيمة هذهالنعلفقلتلاقيمةلهاقالواللهلهيأحب ً لطابعفدأوأا ً
ّقحميقأنأاّلإمكترمإنمّيلإ ّ ا ثمّخرج عليه السلام فخطب الناس فقال إنّ
اللهسبحانهبعثمحمّدًاصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهوليسأحدمنالعربيقرأكتابًاولايدّعي نبوّة
فساق الناس حتّى بوّأهم محلّتهم وبلّغهم منجاتهم فٱستقامت قناتهم وٱطمأنّت
صَفاتهم. أما والله إن كنت لفي ساقتها حتّى تول ّ ت بحذافيرها ما عجزت ولا
جبنت وإنّ مسيري هذا لمثلها فلأنقبنّ الباطل حتّى يخرج الحقّ من جنبه. مالي
ولقريش والله لقد قاتلتهم كافرين ولأقاتلنّهم مفتونين وإن ّ ي لصاحبهم
بالأمس كما أنا صاحبهم اليوم. ١جميعالمخطوطاتالرئيسيّة:كذا.والأشهر:
⟩كتابالبيانوالتبيين⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
157 us the way, a discerning assayer has scrutinized it and pronounced
judgment: ʿAmr ibn Baḥr al-Jāḥiẓ, in his book, Eloquence and Exposition
(al-Bayān wa-l-tabyīn), mentions that certain people attribute this
oration to Muʿāwiyah, then he discusses the issue at some length. This
is the gist of Jāḥiẓ's comments: "These words resemble the words of
ʿAlī. They are closer to his style in categorizing people and providing
information about their state, describing them as beaten, humiliated,
fearful, and terrified. In con- trast, when did we ever see Muʿāwiyah's
speech follow the path of the renunciants and the way of the
worshippers!"1 1.33 FromanorationbyʿAlī,whenhemarchedonthepeopleof
Basra.ʿAbdallāhibnal- ʿAbbās narrated: I entered the Commander of the
Faithful's tent at Dhū Qār and found him mending his sandal. He asked
me, "What's the value of this sandal?" and, when I replied, "It's worth
nothing," he responded, "By God, it's worth more to me than com- mand
over you! That I undertake only to establish truth and fight falsehood!"
Then he went out and addressed the people in the following oration:2 God
sent Muḥammad when no Arab read scripture or claimed prophecy. He
shepherded them until he had brought them to a safe encampment, a place
of refuge, where their lances were straightened and the ground under
them madefirm.ByGod,Ialwaysfoughtinthefront,alwaysbattleduntiltheenemy's
battalions were repulsed and defeated, never holding back from weakness
or cowardice. This march is the same. I shall impale the demon of
falsehood until truth breaks out from its side. Heavens, why do the
Quraysh hate me so? By God, I fought them when they were unbelievers,
and I shall fight them now in this revolt. I brought them to their knees
then and shall do so again. 1 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān, 2:59--61. Attributed to
Muʿāwiyah in Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:176. ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ (Maṣādir,
1:418) argues in favor of the attribution to ʿAlī, based on Raḍī's and
Jāḥiẓ's remarks, and on the fact that the individual who supposedly
narrated the oration from Muʿāwiyah, Shuʿayb ibn Ṣafwān, is considered
an untrustworthy narrator (after Abū Ḥātim al-Rāzī and Ibn ʿAdī). 2 The
march culminated in the Battle of the Camel near Basra in
36/656---between the Caliph ʿAlī on one side, and the Prophet's widow
ʿĀʾishah, and the Prophet's CompanionsṬalḥah and Zubayr on the
other---in which ʿAlī won a decisive victory. This oration is also
narrated in a variant version, §1.101. Dhū Qār was a caravan stop east
of Kufa, in the direction of Wāsiṭ, where ʿAlī camped---on events there,
see Ḥ2:187--188---en route to the Battle of the Camel at Basra.
Alternatively, Mufīd (Irshād, 247) places the oration at Rabadhah, where
hajj pilgrims were also in the audience. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 158 Text
and Translation 1.34ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في ٱستنفار الناس إلى الشام
أُف ٍ لـكم قد سئمت عتابكم أرضيتم بالحياة الدنيا من الآخرة عوضًا وبالذلّ من
العزّخلفًا إذا دعوتكم إلى جهاد عدوّكم دارت أعينكم كأنّكم من الموت في غمرة
ومن الذهول في ةقثب يل متنأ ام .نولقعت ال متنأف ةسولأم مكبولق ّنأكف
نوهمعتف يراوح مكيلعُجَترُ ي ةركس سَجِيس َ الليالي وما أنتم بركن يمال بكم ولا
زوافر عزّ يفتقر إليكم ما أنتم إلّا كإبل ضلّ رعاتها فكلّما جمعت من جانب
ٱنتشرت من آخر لبئس لعمر الله سُعُر نار الحرب أنتم ت ُ
نوهاسةلفغيفمتنأومكنعمانُ يالنوضعتمتالفمكفارطأصقتنتونوديكتالونوداك ّ نإ
هللا ميٱو نولذاختملا هللاو بلُ غ ي لأظنّ بكم أن لو حَمِس الوغى وٱستحرّالموت
قد ٱنفرجتمعنٱبنأبيطالبٱنفراجالرأسعنالبدن.واللهإنّ ٱمرأ ًيمكّنعدوّهمننفسه
يعرق لحمه ويهشم عظمه ويفري جلده لعظيم ٌعجز ُ ه ضعيف ٌ ما ضمّت عليه
جوانحُصدره. أنت فكن ذاك إن شئت فأمّا أنا فوالله دون أن أعطي ذاك ضرب ٌ
بالمشرفيّة تطير منه فراش الهام وتطيح السواعد والأقدام ويفعل الله بعد ذلك
ما يشاء. أيّها الناس إنّ لي مكميلعتو مكيلع مكئيف ريفوتو مكـل ةحيصنلاف ّيلع
مكّقح اّمأف . ّقح ّيلع مكـلو ا ً ّقح مكيلع كيلا تجهلوا وتأديبكم كيما
تعلموا. وأمّا حقّي عليكم فالوفاء بالبيعة والنصيحة في المشهد والمغيب
والإجابة حين أدعو كم والطاعة حين آمر كم. 1.35ومن خطبة له عليه السلام بعد
التحکيم al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
159 1.34 From an oration by ʿAlī, as he mobilized his followers to fight
the Syrians:1 Shame! I am tired of rebuking you! Is it that you are
satisfied with this world in exchange for the hereafter? Is it that you
are happy with humiliation after having known strength and might? When I
call you to fight your enemy, you roll your eyes as though in the throes
of death, as if numb with strong drink. You struggle to find words and
appear mystified by what I say, pretending that your minds are addled
and that you grasped nothing. To the end of the long nights, never will
you be supporters in whom I can trust, or a column on which I can lean,
or allies on whom I can depend! You are like camels whose herder is at
his wits end---each time he gathers them from one side, they scatter
from another. God's life! What cowards you are when faced with the
flames of war! Your enemies conspire but you do not respond, your
boundaries contract but you feel no anger, your enemies never sleep but
you remain merrily oblivious. By God, the slothful will be crushed! By
God, I know that when battle blazes and death burns, you will split from
Abū Ṭālib's son as cleanly as a head sliced off a body. By God, how
powerless the man who lets his enemy eat his flesh, pound his bones, and
flay his skin! His ribs conceal a feeble heart! You be that person if
you wish. I, by God, shall strike a blow with my Mashrafī sword that
will crush skulls and sever limbs.Then God may do with me as he wills!
People! You have rights over me, and I have rights over you. I owe you
sincere coun- sel, generous stipends, teaching that dispels ignorance,
and lessons that make you better. You owe me fulfilment of your pledge
and sincere support in my presence and my absence. You must answer when
I call and obey when I com- mand. 1.35 From an oration by ʿAlī after the
arbitration:2 1 ʿAlī delivered this oration in Kufa, shortly after
defeating the Kharijites at Nahrawān. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:90--91. It is
his fourth post-Nahrawān oration attempting to muster his followers
against Muʿāwiyah---the first was at Nahrawān itself, the second at
Nukhaylah, near Kufa, the third immediately after reaching Kufa, and
this, the fourth, after a few days had passed in Kufa. Details of his
followers' responses at each of these events in B 239; Ḥ2:193--197. ʿAbd
al- Zahrāʾ(Maṣādir,2:192)arguesthatthisispartof
thesameorationas§1.94whichʿAlīdelivered after Nahrawān, when the Kufans
held back from marching on Muʿāwiyah. 2 Refers to the arbitration
(taḥkīm) between ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah, after the Battle of Ṣiffīn, at the
hands of Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣat Dūmat al-Jandal, in
37/658 (on the arbi-
tration,seeḤ2:206--264).ThisorationbyʿAlīwasdeliveredsoonthereafterinKufa,beforethe
Battle of Nahrawān. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:77; Ḥ2:206; B 242--243 (includes
an additional section). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 160 Text and
Translation الحمد لله وإن أتی الدهر بالخطب الفادح والحدث الجليل وأشهد أن
لا إل ٰ ه إلّا الله ليس معه إل ٰ ه غيره وأنّ محمدًا عبده ورسوله صل ّ ی الله
عليه وآله. أمّا بعد. فإنّ معصية الناصح الشفيق العالم المجرّب تورث الحسرة
وتعقب الندامة وقد کنت
أمرتکمفيهذهالحکومةأمريونخلتلـکممخزونرأيي⟩لوکانيطاعلقُصيرٍأمرٌ⟨فأبيتم
عليّإباءالمخالفينالجفاةوالمنابذينالعصاةحتیٱرتابالناصحبنصحهوضنّ الزندبقدحه
فکنت أنا وإيّاکم کما قال أخو هوازن١ َ رــَعْنُ مِب يِرــْمَأ ٗمُکُتْرَمَأ جِ اللِّ وٰی َ
ت ْمَلَ ف صُ ّنلا اوُ نيِبَ تْس َ حُض ا َ ّل ِإ َح ْ ی الْغَدٖ 1.36ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام في تخويف أهل النهروان فأنا نذير لـکم أن تصبحوا صرعی بأثناء هذا
النهر وبأهضام هذا الغائط علی غير بيّنة من ربّکم ولا سلطان مبين معکم قد
طوّحت بکم الدار وٱحتبلـکم المقدار وقد کنت نهيتکم عن هذه الحکومة فأبيتم
عليّ إباء المخالفين الجفاة والمنابذين العصاة٢ حتّی صرفت ُ رأيي تدرأ الو اً
رْجُب مکـل ابأ ال تآ ملو مالحألا ءاهفس ماهلا ءاّفخأ رشاعم متنأو مکاوه یلإ
.ا ً ّرض مکب ١البحر:الطويل. ٢م،ي:كذا.ش،ن،ھ: ⟩المخالفينالمنابذين⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
161 I praise God even though this age has brought a great calamity and
dealt a mighty blow. I testify that there is no god but God---there is
no god other than he. I testify that Muḥammad is his servant and
messenger---may God bless him and his descendants. And now to the matter
at hand:1 Disobeying a kind, learned, and experienced counselor yields
only regret and remorse. I gave you my considered opinion regarding this
arbitration, ⟨O if only Qaṣīr's command had been obeyed!⟩2 With
rebellious defiance you rejected my warnings, enough to make a
counsellor doubt his own counsel and a flint hold back its spark! In
this, you and I may be likened to the Hawāzin poet's lines:3 I gave you
my considered opinion At the place of the winding sands But you heeded
not my counsel Till forenoon the next day. 1.36 From an oration by ʿAlī
warning the people of Nahrawān:4 I warn you! Take heed or you will soon
be corpses strewn at the bend of this river in the hollows of this
plain, holding no mandate from your Lord or proof of righteousness, cast
out by your lands, and enmeshed in fate's deadly snare. I forbade you
from engaging in arbitration, but you challenged me with defi- ance and
insolence until I gave in to your reckless dictates. Lightheaded fools,
the lot of you! May you be deprived of fathers! I'm not the one who has
brought calamity on you, nor have I ever intended you harm. 1 "And now
to the matter at hand" (lit. "As for what comes after," ammā baʿdu), is
a standard phrase in the early Arabic oration, inserted between the
praise-and-benedictions formula and the body of the oration. 2 Proverb
referring to the treacherous death of the pre-Islamic Iraqi Azdī king
Jadhīmah ("the leper") ibn Mālik ibn Naṣr (fl. 3rd c. ad)---at the hands
of the Queen of Palmyra, Zenobia, whose father he had killed and whom he
had set out to wed---and the unheeded warnings of his wise counsellor
Qaṣīr ibn Saʿd al-Lakhmī. For details of the incident, see Maydānī,
Majmaʿ al-amthāl, 1:570--575 (under "khaṭb yasīr fī khaṭb kabīr"); R
1:243; B 243--244; Kawar, "D ̲ j̲ad̲h̲īma al-Abras̲h̲ or al-Waḍḍāḥ,"ei2; and
Shahid, "al-Zabbāʾ,"ei2. 3 Often cited proverbially, the verse is by
Durayd ibn al-Ṣimmah (Dīwān, 61) of the Hawāzin tribe, a famous poet and
warrior who lived mostly in the pre-Islamic period and is said to have
been killed at the age of a hundred fighting against Muḥammad in the
Battle of Ḥunayn in 8/630. The verse is from a poem lamenting Durayd's
deceased brother ʿAbdallāh, which begins: (أَرَث َ بْعَم ِّمُأ ْنِم ِلْبَ حلاُديِدَج
َ ّ دٖ .)R 1:243--244; B 244--245. 4 Nahrawān,eastof
theTigrisRiverinIraq,isthelocationandnameof apitchedbattlebetween ʿAlī
and the Kharijites, and this oration was delivered in 38/658 before the
battle (Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:84, 91, includes full oration text). For
details on the Kharijites and the Battle of Nahrawān, see B 245--246;
Ḥ2:265--283. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 162 Text and
Translation 1.37ومن کلام له عليه السلام يجري مجری الخطبة فقمت بالأمر حين
فشلوا وتطلّعت حين تعتعوا ومضيت بنور الله حين وقفوا وکنت أخفضهم صوتًا
وأعلاهم فوتًا فطرت بعنانها وٱستبددت برِهانها کالجبل لا تحرّکه
القواصفولاتزيلهالعواصفلميکنلأحدفيّمهمزولالقائلفيّمغمزالذليلعندي عزيز حتّی
آخذ الحقّ له والقوي ّ عندي ضعيف حتّی آخذ الحقّ منه رضينا عن الله ّ لص هللا
لوسر یلع بذکأ ينارُ تأ .هرمأ هلل انمّ لسو هاضق ى الله عليه وآله والله لأنا
أوّل من صدّقه فلا أکون أوّل من کذب عليه فنظرت في أمري فإذا طاعتي قد سبقت
بيعتي وإذا الميثاق في عنقي لغيري. 1.38ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.38.1وإنّما سمّيت الشبهة شبهة لأنّها تشبه الحقّ . 1.38.2فأمّا أولياء الله
فضياؤهم فيها اليقين ودليلهم سمت الهدی وأمّا أعداء الله
فدعاؤهمالضلالودليلهمالعمیفماينجومنالموتمنخافهولايعطیالبقاءمنأحبّه.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
163 1.37 From an address by ʿAlī that resembles an oration:1 I answered
Muḥammad's call when others held back, sped forward when oth- ers
dragged their feet, and welcomed God's light when others hesitated. The
humblest in speech, I outpaced all in action. With the reins of religion
firmly in my hands, I flew like the wind, staking everything I
possessed, like a moun- tain that no gales could shake, no storms could
budge. No one can find fault or speak ill of me in any of this. In my
eyes, the weak were mighty as I strove to restore their rights, the
mighty were weak as I wrested from them the rights of the weak. I
accepted God's decree and bowed to his command. Do you think I
wouldlieregardingGod'sMessengerwhenIwasthefirsttosupporthim?Ishall not
be the first to lie about him! But when I paused to reflect on my
situation, I found that my obedience had preceded my oath of allegiance,
and my pledge was a shackle around my neck.2 1.38 From an oration by
ʿAlī: 1.38.1 Doubt is called doubt because it resembles truth.3 1.38.2
Certainty illumines the way for those who place their faith in God, and
the path of right guidance carries them forward, while the call of God's
ene- mies is the embodiment of error, and their guide is blindness
itself. You will not escape death just because you fear it. You will not
remain in this world just because you want to.4 1 The address was
delivered following the Battle of Nahrawān against the Kharijites in
Ṣafar
38/658.Ḥ1:284.Kulaynī(Kāfī,1:454--456)narratesthefirstparagraphasaposthumousaddress
in the second grammatical person, by an anonymous speaker to ʿAlī, just
after he died. 2 Multiple pronouns make this an ambiguous statement. The
majority interpretation is this: ʿAlī is saying that he was obliged to
obey the wishes of the Messenger who had commanded him to refrain from
raising his sword to seek his right. He was thus forced to give an oath
of
allegiancetotheearliercaliphs,forhispledgetotheMessengerwasashacklearoundhisneck
that stopped him from fighting for his right (Ḥ2:296; B 249; Gh 1:242).
A second interpretation is this: ʿAlī is saying that the people had been
commanded to render him obedience, a man- date that preceded their
actual oath of allegiance to him; their pledge to him was a shackle
around his neck, and he could not refuse to lead them (B 249). 3 The
line plays on the paronomasia ( jinās) between "doubt" (shubhah), and
"resemble" (tush- bih), both deriving from the root letters "Sh-B-H." 4
Some sources attribute the last two lines to ʿAlī's associate Mālik
al-Ashtar in the lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn, in a speech he gave
following ʿAlī's speech, calling on the people to march
onMuʿāwiyah.Minqarī,WaqʿatṢiffīn,95;Iskāfī,
Miʿyār,126;AbūḤanīfahal-Dīnawarī, Akhbār, 164. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 164 Text
and Translation 1.39ومن خطبة له عليه السلام مُنيت ُ
بمنلايطيعإذاأمرتولايجيبإذادعوتلاأبالـکمماتنتظرونبنصر کمربّکم. أما دين
يجمعکم ولا حميّة تحمشکم. أقوم فيکم مستصرخًا وأناديکم متغوّثًا فلا تسمعون لي
قولًا ولا تطيعون لي أمرًا حتّی تَکشّف الأمور عن عواقب المساءة فما يدرک بکم
ثأر ولا يبلغ بکم مرام. دعوتکم إلی نصر إخوانکم فجرجرتم جرجرة الجمل الأَس َ
رّوتثاقلتم تثاقل النِّض ُ ي اَ مَ ّنَأَك﴿ فيعض بئاذتم دينج مکنم ّيلإ جرخّمث
ربدألا و ْ َ ل ِإ َنوُ قاَس ى ٱلْمَوْت ِ وَهُمْ يَنظُر ُ ونَ﴾.
قولهعليهالسلام⟩متذائب⟨أيمضطربمنقولهم⟩تذاءبتالريح⟨ايٱضطربهبوبهاومنه سمّي
الذئب لٱضطراب مشيته. 1.40لاق .⟨هلل اّلإ مکح ال⟩ مهلوق عمس اّ مل جراوخلا
ىنعم يف مالسلا هيلع هل مالک نمو کلمة حقّ يراد بها باطل. نعم إنّه لا حکم
إلّا لله ولـکن هؤلاء يقولون لا إمرة وإنّه لا بدّ للناس من أمير برّأو فاجر
يعمل فی إمرته المؤمن ويستمتع فيها الکافر ويبلّغ الله فيها
الأجلويجمعبهالفيءويقاتلبهالعدوّوتأمنبهالسبلويؤخذبهللضعيفمنالقوي ّ حتّی
يستريح برّويستراح من فاجر. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
165 1.39 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 I am tested with followers who do not
obey my command or answer my call. May you be deprived of fathers!What
are you waiting for?Why do you not fight and serve your Lord? Does no
religion unite you, no outraged honor goad you to action? I stand among
you shouting till I'm hoarse, appealing to you for suc- cor, but you
hear not a word, not a single command.These events are the result of
your despicable behavior. No requital can be sought with you at my side,
no purpose achieved. When I summoned you to come to your brothers' aid,
you growled like a sullen camel with sores on its chest, you plodded
like a scraggy beast with lesions on its rump. The few who came forward
came limp and dithering, «as though driven to a death they could see in
front of their eyes.»2 Raḍī: By "dithering (mutadhāʾib)," ʿAlī means:
"jerkily," from the commonly used phrase, "the wind dithered (tadhāʾabat
al-rīḥ)," meaning, "it blew jerkily." It is from this mean- ing---the
jerkiness of its walk---that the wolf (dhiʾb) is named. 1.40 From an
address by ʿAlī when he heard the Kharijites shout, ⟨No rule save
God's!⟩:3 The statement is true, but the intent is false. Yes, there is
no authority save God's, but these people are claiming that there should
be no other ruler. In truth, the community must have a ruler, whether
pious or wicked, under whose
jurisdictionbelieversdogoodanddisbelieversmakemerry,tillGodbringseach
period to its destined conclusion. Taxes need to be collected, enemies
repudi- ated, highways protected, and rights wrested from the mighty for
the weak---all this, until the pious ruler goes to his rest, or the
wicked ruler's death allows the community to rest. 1 ʿAlī delivered this
address in Kufa following the raid by Muʿāwiyah's commander, Nuʿmān ibn
Bashīr al-Anṣārī, on ʿAyn al-Tamr, west of the Euphrates, on the
frontier between Syria and Iraq, in 39/659 (Ḥ1:301; B 250; see events of
the raid in Ḥ1:301--306; Zetterstéen, "al-Nuʿmān b. Bas̲h̲īr,"ei2; see
also §1.66, delivered at around the same time). Some lines are
transcribed by Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 5:107) within an oration ʿAlī delivered
chastising the Kufans for not respond- ing to his call to mobilize in
aid of Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, who was killed by ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ in Egypt
in 38/658. 2 Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:6. 3 Ar. Lā ḥukma illā li-llāh. ʿAlī was
preaching in the mosque in Kufa, in 37/657, soon after the Battle of
Ṣiffīn, when he was interrupted by a group of Kharijites shouting this
slogan, and he responded with the words at hand (Balādhurī, Ansāb,
2:404; Shāfiʿī, Umm, 4:229; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:72--73; see the events
surrounding the Kharijites' use of this slogan, and ʿAlī's attempts to
conciliate them before the Battle of Nahrawān, in Ḥ2:310--312). The
first Kharijite to utter the slogan was Burak (or al-Ḥajjāj) ibn
ʿAbdallāh al-Tamīmī, who later conspired with the Kharijites Ibn Muljam
and ʿAmr ibn Bakr to assassinate ʿAlī, Muʿāwiyah, and ʿAmr ibn al- ʿĀṣ;
Ibn Muljam killed ʿAlī, but the other two attempts failed, and all three
conspirators were immediately executed (R 1:252). See also §1.182 and
§3.182. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 166 Text and
Translation لاق مهميکحت عمس اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هّنأ ىرخأ ةياور يفو حکم الله
أنتظر فيکم. وقال أمّا الإمرة البرّة فيعمل فيها التقيّ وأمّا الإمرة الفاجرة
فيتمتّع فيها الشقيّ إلی أن تنقطع مدّته وتدر که منيّته. 1.41ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام إنّ الوفاء توأم الصدق ولا أعلم جُنّة أوقی منه وما يغدر من علم کيف
المرجع ولقد أصبحنا في زمان قد ٱتّخذ أکثر أهله الغدر کَيْسًا ونسبهم أهل الجهل
فيه إلی حسن بَ ّلُقلا ُلَ ّوُ حلایرَ يدقهللامهلتاقمهلام.ةليحلا ُ
وجهَالحيلةودونهامانعمنأمراللهونهيه فيدعها رأي عين بعد القدرة عليها وينتهز
فرصتها من لا حريجة له في الدين. 1.42ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أيّهاالناسإنّ
أخوفماأخافعليکمٱثنتانٱتّباعالهویوطولالأملفأمّاٱتّباعالهوی فيصدّ عن الحقّ وأمّا
طول الأمل فينسي الآخرة ألا وإنّ الدنيا قد ول ّ ت حذّاء فلم يبق منها إلّا
صُبابةکصبابة الإناء ٱصطبّها صابّها ألا وإنّ الآخرة قد أقبلت ولکلّ منهما بنون
فکونوامن أبناءالآخرة ولا تکونوامنأبناءالدنيافإنّ کلّ ولدسيلحق بأمّه
يومالقيامة وإنّ اليوم عمل ولا حساب وغدًا حساب ولا عمل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 167 In another version of the report, ʿAlī said the
following when he heard their declaration about authority: It's the
manifestation of God's authority in you that I'm waiting for! In a third
version, he said: Under the rule of the pious, the virtuous perform good
deeds. Under the rule of the wicked, the wretched make merry till their
time runs out and death over- takes them. 1.41 From an oration by ʿAlī:1
Loyalty is honesty's twin. I know of no better shield from hellfire, and
those who believe they will return to God never betray.We have entered
an age when the public equates betrayal with intelligence and the
ignorant view duplicitous liars as clever strategists.What is wrong with
them? May God punish them!The man of discernment also knows how to
practice cunning, but he is checked by God's commands and prohibitions.
Although he sees the option and has the capability, he chooses to
refrain. It is the man who has no religion or scruple who exploits the
opportunity to deceive. 1.42 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 People! I fear
most for you two things: pursuit of desire and lengthy yearnings.
Pursuit of desire stops you from seeing the truth, while lengthy
yearnings make
youforgetthehereafter.Takeheed!Theworldisretreatinginhaste!Onlyasmall
residue remains, like dregs in an emptied vessel. Take heed! The
hereafter is at hand! And each of the two has children. Be children of
the hereafter, be not children of the world, for children will be
returned to their mothers on the day of resurrection. Today is the day
for deeds, not reckoning. Tomorrow is the day of reckoning, not deeds. 1
The commentators do not provide context, but Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd narrates
examples of ʿAlī's honorable actions in war, including his allowing
Muʿāwiyah's army to access the river, even after they had earlier denied
it to him. Ḥ2:313--314. The "man of discernment" is ʿAlī himself. 2 ʿAlī
delivered this oration in the Grand Mosque in Kufa immediately following
his arrival after the Battle of the Camel in Rajab 36/656. Minqarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 3--4 (with this text, and fur- ther sections of the
oration containing political themes). Some lines are similar in §1.28
and §1.45. Kulaynī (Kāfī, 8:58) transcribes it as the earlier part of
§1.50, which is placed by Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:191) after the arbitration
in 37/658. Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 211) attributes the oration to the Prophet,
via ʿAlī. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 168 Text and
Translation 1.43ومن کلام له عليه السلام وقد أشار عليه أصحابه بالاستعداد
للحرب بعد إرساله جرير بن عبد الله إلی معاوية إنّ ٱستعدادي لحرب أهل الشام
وجرير عندهم إغلاق للشام وصرف لأهله عن خير تَ ّقو دق نکـلو هودارأ نإ عم
يأرلاو اً يصاع وأ اًعودخم اّلإ هدعب ميقي ال اً تقو ريرجل ُ ّ
الأناةفأرْوِدواولاأکرهلـکمالإعداد.ولقدضربتأنفهذاالأمروعينهوقلّبتظهره وبطنه
فلم أر لي إلّا القتال أو الـکفر إنّه قد کان علی الأمّة والٍ أحدث أحداثًا
وأوجد الناس مقالًا فقالوا ثمّنقموا فغيّروا. 1.44عاتبٱ دق ناکو ةيواعم
یلإّينابيشلا ةريبه نب ةلقصم بره اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالک نمو سبي بني
ناجية من عامل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وأعتقهم فلمّا طالبه بالمال خاس َ
به وهرب إلی الشام. فقال قبّحاللهمصقلةف َ
عَلفِعْلالسادةوفرّفرارالعبيدفماأنطقمادحهحتّیأسکتهولاصدّق واصفه حتّی بکّته ولو
أقام لأخذنا ميسوره وٱنتظرنا بماله وفوره. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 169 1.43 From ʿAlī's reply to his associates who, soon after
he had sent Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh as envoy to Muʿāwiyah, were urging him
to make preparations for battle:1 If I prepared to battle the Syrians
while Jarīr is still with them, I would close the door to reconciliation
and eliminate the chance, were they to wish it, of a peaceful outcome. I
have given Jarīr a limit for his return, which he should adhere to
unless he is deceived or disobedient. I think we must wait, so go
slowly, although I too am not against preparing. I've examined the eyes
and nose of this affair, and flipped it over, back to belly, and the
only alternative I see to fighting is to forsake Islam. Our community
had a leader who instituted unwarranted practices, and he gave people
the opportunity to rebuke him.2 They rebuked him, then turned hostile,
and took it upon themselves to effect change. 1.44 From an address by
ʿAlī after Maṣqalah ibn Hubayrah al-Shaybānī defected to
Muʿāwiyah.Maṣqalahhadpurchasedcaptiveslavesof
theBanūNājiyahfromʿAlī'scom- mander in order to free them. When the
commander asked for payment, he reneged and fled to Syria.3 May God
strike Maṣqalah with shame! Hebehavedlikea chieftain then fledlike a
slave! No sooner had he prompted his admirers to utter his praises
before he shut their mouths, no sooner had he confirmed his extollers'
commendations before he turned round and rebuked them. Had he remained
in Iraq, I would have shown leniency and allowed him to postpone payment
until his fortunes improved. 1 ʿAlī delivered this address in Kufa,
shortly after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656. Jarīr had been
ʿUthmān's governor in Hamadān, and, when ʿAlī dismissed him, he came to
ʿAlī in Kufa and pledged allegiance. According to the sources, however,
he remained pro-Umayyad. Details of Jarīr's embassy to Muʿāwiyah in
Damascus as ʿAlī's envoy, and related events and epistles, in Ḥ3:74--91.
See also Jarīr's background with ʿAlī in Ḥ3:70--74. 2 Refers to the
third caliph, ʿUthmān (d. 35/656), who was killed in Medina by a group
of Mus- lims from Kufa and Egypt decrying his nepotism and other
shortcomings. Ḥ2:323--333, 3:1--69 (with details of these events and the
people's grievances); B 257--258. 3 This event took place after the
arbitration, in the early months of 38/658, and ʿAlī's oration was
delivered in Kufa. Maṣqalah was then ʿAlī's governor in Ardashīr. The
commander from whom he had purchased the freedom of the Banū Nājiyah
captives was Maʿqil ibn Qays al- Riyāḥī. When Maṣqalah fled to Syria,
Muʿāwiyah appointed him to several important posts. Details of these
events and people in Ḥ3:120--151; R 1:258--261; B 258; Balādhurī, Ansāb,
2:417-- 418; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:113--132 ("The Banū Nājiyah Episode"),
5:128--131; Pellat, "al-K̲h̲irrīt," ei2. See also ʿAlī's earlier epistles
to Maṣqalah chastising him for misappropriating treasury funds, §2.39
and §2.44. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 170 Text and
Translation 1.45ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
الحمدللهغيرمقنوطمنرحمتهولامخلوّمننعمتهولامأيوسمنمغفرتهولامستنکف عن عبادته
الذي لا تبرح منه رحمة ولا تفقد له نعمة. والدنيا دار مُني لها الفناء
ولأهلها منها الجلاء وهي حلوة خضرة قد عُجّلت للطالب وٱلتبست بقلب الناظر
فٱرتحلوا منها بأحسن ما بحضرتکم من الزاد ولا تسألوا فيها فوق الـکفاف ولا
تطلبوا منها أکثر من البلاغ. 1.46ومن کلام له عليه السلام عند عزمه علی
المسير إلی الشام الّٰلهمّ إن ّ ي أعوذ بک من وعثاء السفر وکآبة المنقلب وسوء
المنظر في الأهل والمال والولد.١ الّٰلهمّ أنت الصاحب في السفر وأنت الخليفة
في الأهل ولا يجمعهما غيرک لأنّ .اًفلختسم نوکي ال بحصتسملاو اً بحصتسم نوکي
ال فلختسملا وٱبتداء هذا الکلام مروي ّ عن رسول الله صل ّ ی الله عليه وآله
وقد قفّاه عليه السلام بأبلغ کلام وتمّمه بأحسن تمام من قوله ⟩ولا يجمعهما
غيرک⟨إلی آخر الفصل. 1.47ومن کلام له عليه السلام في ذ کر الـکوفة کأن ّ َ
مُ تةفوکايکبي َ رعُ تو ّيظاکعلاميدألا ّدم َنيّد ّ نإولزالزلابنيبکرُ
تولزاونلابنيک ي لأعلم أنّه ما أراد بک جبّار سوءًا إلّا ٱبتلاه الله بشاغل
ورماه بقاتل. ١ي: كذا. م: ⟩في الأهل والمال⟨. ن، ش: ⟩في النفس والأهل
والمال⟨. ھ: ⟩في النفس والأهل والمالوالولد⟨.وأضيفتفيهامشم،ش: ⟩والولد⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
171 1.45 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 I praise God, never uncertain of his
mercy, never empty of his favors, never doubtful of his forgiveness,
never grudging in his worship. His mercy never ends, his favors never
cease. The world is an abode whose edifice awaits destruction and whose
people await eviction. Sweetand green, she appears to the seeker as a
gift and ensnares the viewer's heart. People! Leave her with the best
provisions you can find. In life, do not ask of her more than you need,
or seek from her more than you require. 1.46 From ʿAlī's supplication
when he began the march to Syria:2 God, protect me from the hardships of
travel, a sorrowful end, and the grief of seeing my family, children,
and property in ruin. God, you are my companion in this journey and the
guardian I leave behind with my family. Only you can do both, for a man
who is left behind cannot travel as a companion, and a man who travels
as a companion cannot be left behind. Raḍī: The opening lines of this
supplication have also been narrated from God's Mes- senger.3
Beautifully completing the Prophet's, ʿAlī added his own eloquent lines:
"Only you can do both," to the end of the piece. 1.47 From an address by
ʿAlī about Kufa:4 I see you, Kufa, stretched like raw leather on display
at the Market of ʿUkāẓ, beset by calamities and plagued with tremors.
But I also know that should a tyrant intend you harm, God will engulf
him in misfortune, then send a man to kill him. 1 Two unconnected
excerpts from ʿAlī's sermon on ʿĪd al-Fiṭr or ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā, presumably
deliv- ered in Kufa in one of the four years of his caliphate between
36/656 and 40/661. Also part of this sermon is §1.28 (and its variant
recension, §1.52). B 221, 259. Baḥrānī (B 259) says it is an ʿĪd al-Fiṭr
sermon, but, if it is part of §1.52, and since §1.52.3 mentions the
sacrificial animal, it was more likely delivered on ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā. 2 ʿAlī
intoned this prayer "when he placed his foot in the stirrup," as he was
leaving from his home in Kufa to fight Muʿāwiyah in Syria. Before
praying it, he intoned the name of God and
theQurʾanicverse,«Gloriousistheonewhosubjugatedthis(mount) toouruse,
otherwisewe would not have been capable» (Qurʾan, Zukhruf 43:13:َنيِ نِرْقُمُ
هَ ل اَ ّ نُك اَمَو اَذَٰه اَ نَ لَ رَ ّخَس يِذَ ّ لٱ َناَحْبُس .) Ḥ3:166--169 (with
further prayers by ʿAlī during this march); Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn,
132--133. 3 See, e.g., Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, 2:979 (§1343). 4 For examples of
"tyrants" killed in Kufa in the early Umayyad period, see B 262. On
sayings of the Prophet's family regarding "virtues of Kufa," see
Ḥ3:198--199. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 172 Text and
Translation 1.48ومن خطبة له عليه السلام عند المسير إلی الشام الحمد لله
کلّما وقب ليل وغسق والحمد لله کلّما لاح نجم وخفق والحمد لله غير مفقود
الإنعام ولا مکافأ الإفضال. أمّا بعد. نأ تيأر دقو يرمأ مهيتأي یّتح طاطْلِ ملا
اذه موزلب مهترمأو يتمدقم تثعب دقف أقطع هذه النطفة إلی شرذمة منکم موطّنين
أکناف دجلة فأنهضهم معکم إلی عدوّکم وأجعلهم من أمداد القوّة لـکم. يعني عليه
السلام بـ⟩الملطاط⟨هاهنا السمت الذي أمرهم بلزومه وهو شاطئ الفرات ويقال
ذلـک أيضًا لشاطئ البحر وأصله ما ٱستوی من الأرض. ويعني بـ⟩النطفة⟨ماء
الفرات وهو من غريب العبارات وعجيبها. 1.49ومن خطبة له عليه السلام الحمد
لله الذي بطن خفيّات ِ الأمور ودل ّ ت عليه أعلام الظهور وٱمتنع علی عين
البصير هنم یلعأ ءيش الف ّولعلا يف قبس .هرصبي هتبثأ نم بلق الو هرکنُ ت هري
مل نَم ُنيع الف وقرب في الدنوّفلا شيء أقرب منه فلا ٱستعلاؤه باعده عن شيء
من خلقه ولا قربه ساواهم في المکان به. لم يطلع العقول علی تحديد صفته ولم
يحجبها عن واجب معرفته فهو الذي تشهد له أعلام الوجود علی إقرار قلب ذي
الجحود تعالی الله عمّا يقول المشبّهون .اًريبک اً ّولع هل نودحاجلاو هب
1.50ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ّ لوتيو هللا باتک اهيف فلاخي عدتبُ ت ماکحأو
عبّتُ ت ءاوهأ نتفلا عوقو ءدب امّنإ ی عليها رجال رجالًا علی غير دين الله فلو
أنّ الباطل خلص من مزاج الحقّ لم يخف َ علی المرتادين ولو أنّ الحقّ خلص من لبس
الباطل ٱنقطعت عنه ألسن المعاندين ولـکن يؤخذ من هذا َنيِذَ ّ لٱ﴿ وجنيو
هئايلوأ یلع ناطيشلا يلوتسي کـلانهف ناجزميف ثغض اذه نمو ثغِض سَب َ قَت ُ هَ ل
ْ مْ﴾من الله ﴿ٱلْح ُ سْن َ ى ٰ ﴾. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
173 1.48 From an oration by ʿAlī when he marched on Syria:1 I praise God
whenever night spreads and darkens. I praise God whenever stars rise and
set. I praise God whose favors are never deficient and whose gifts can
never be repaid. And now to the matter at hand: I have dispatched my
vanguard and commanded them to stay close to the high bank until I send
further orders. I intend to cross this clear water and make contact with
the tribesmen who live in the lee of the Tigris. I will recruit them to
fight your enemy and increase your strength and numbers. Raḍī: By "high
bank (milṭāṭ)," ʿAlī means the path he has commanded them to follow
alongthebanksof
theEuphrates.Thewordisalsousedfortheseashore,anditsoriginal meaning is
level ground. By "clear water (nuṭfah)" he means the water of the
Euphrates, and it is a strange and marvelous expression. 1.49 From an
oration by ʿAlī: Praise God, who is concealed in unseen mysteries but
confirmed by clear signs. He is hidden from the keenest observer, yet
the eye that does not see him cannot deny his existence, while the heart
that acknowledges him cannot com- prehend him. He is lofty and nothing
is loftier than he, he is near and nothing is nearer than he, yet his
loftiness does not distance him from his creatures, while his nearness
does not place him with them. He has not revealed to intellects his true
description, but neither has he veiled them from recognizing him, which
they must do. Creation bears witness to the creator and compels the
denier to acknowledge him in his heart, but his reality is exalted above
whatever is said about him by those who liken him to his creation, or
those who deny his exis- tence. 1.50 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 Revolt
begins with the indulgence of whims and the prescription of heresies,
wherebyGod'sBookisdisobeyed,andmenfollowmenindefianceof God'sreli- gion.
If falsehood had no trace of truth, its evil would not be concealed from
observers, and if truth had no shadow of falsehood, its enemies' tongues
would
besilenced.Butabitistakenfromhere,abitistakenfromthere,theyaremixed
together,andloandbehold,Satangainsmasteryoverhisfollowers!Only«those for
whom» God's «blessings have been decreed» are saved.3 1 ʿAlī delivered
this oration on 5 Shawwāl 37ah (Wednesday, March 17, 658ad) at
Nukhaylah, just outside Kufa, en route to Ṣiffīn. Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn,
131--132; B 263 (includes a summary of the vanguard's commanders and
numbers, and of ensuing events); Ḥ3:201 (further lines from the
oration), Ḥ3:202--215 (details of the events). 2 ʿAlī delivered this
oration in Kufa after the arbitration in 37/658. Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:191.
3 Qurʾan, Anbiyāʾ 21:101. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 174 Text and
Translation 1.51نيّفصب تارفلا ةعيرش یلع هباحصأ ةيواعم باحصأ بلغ اّ مل
مالسلا هيلع همالك نمو ومنعوهم من الماء قد ٱستطعمو کم القتال فأقرّوا علی
مذل ّ ة وتأخير محل ّ اوَوْرَ ت ءامدلا نم فويسلا اوّور وأ ة ًةمُ ل داق ةيواعم
ّنإو الأ نيرهاق مکتوم یف ةايحلاو نيروهقم مکتايح یف توملاف ءاملا نم من
الغواة وعمّس عليهم الخـبر حتّی جعلوا نحورهم أغراض المنيّة. 1.52ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام. قد تقدّم مختارها برواية ونذ كرها ههنا برواية أخرى لتغاير
الروايتين 1.52.1ألا وإنّ الدنيا قد تصرّمت وآذنت بٱنقضاء وتنکّر معروفها
وأدبرت حذّاء فهي تحفز بالفناء سکّانها وتحدو بالموت جيرانها وقد أمرّ فيها ما
کان حلوًا و کدر منها ما کان َ ملا ةعرجک ةعرج وأ ةوادإلا ةلمسکةلَ مَس اّلإ
اهنم قبي ملف اًوفص قْلة لو تمزّزها الصديان لم ينقع. 1.52.2فأزمعوا عباد الله
الرحيل عن هذه الدار المقدور علی أهلها الزوال ولا يغلبنّکم فيها الأمل ولا
يطولنّ عليکم الأمد فوالله لو حننتم حنين الوُل ّ ه العِجال ودعوتم به َ ديل
الحماموجأرتمجُؤارمتبتّليالرهبانوخرجتمإلیاللهمنالأموالوالأولادٱلتماسالقربة
إليهفيٱرتفاعدرجةعندهأوغفرانسيّئةأحصتهاکتبهوحفظهارسلهلکانقليل ً افيما
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
175 1.51 From ʿAlī's address when Muʿāwiyah's army prevailed over his by
the Euphrates, and blocked their access to water:1 By this act, they beg
to be fed the victuals of war. You can either accept defeat and retreat,
or quench your swords' thirst for blood and your thirst for water. Death
to a life that accepts defeat! Life, in reality, is in a fighter's
death! Hark my words! Muʿāwiyah leads a band of fools and imbeciles. By
muddying reports of what happened,2 he has deceived them into exposing
their throats to fate's arrows. 1.52 From an oration by ʿAlī, parts of
which were cited earlier in a different transmis- sion. We record it
again in this transmission because of the variance between the two:3
1.52.1 Harken!The world has severed its rope and announced its end, its
favors have become strangers and it turns away in speed, it spurs its
residents to anni- hilation and drives its neighbors toward death, its
sweetness has turned bitter and its clarity has become turbid, all that
remains of it is the last few drops in the jug, the last mouthfuls
apportioned with a pebble.4 The thirsty man sucks on it in desperation,
but it does not even wet his throat. 1.52.2 Servants of God, make ready
to quit this abode, for its residents are fated to die. Let not hopes of
its permanence take hold, nor suppose your time in it to be long. By
God, if you were to moan like bereaved camel mares, supplicate like
cooing doves, and intone like praying hermits, or if you forsook
property and children to attain nearness to God, to achieve a high
station near him, or forgiveness for the sins that are recorded in his
accounts and noted by his 1 When the two armies arrived at Ṣiffīn in Dhū
al-Ḥijjah 36/ June 657, Muʿāwiyah's troops took control of the riverbank
and blocked ʿAlī's troops from the water. ʿAlī fought and prevailed.
Against the urgings of his supporters to requite like for like, ʿAlī
allowed Muʿāwiyah's troops unfettered access to drink. Minqarī, Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 156--162; Ḥ3:312--331; Gh 1:287. 2 I.e., by falsely accusing
ʿAlī of ʿUthmān's murder. 3 ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā sermon, as evidenced by its
reference to the sacrificial animal (§1.52.3). See also the opening
lines of this sermon---in Ṣadūq, Man lā yaḥḍuruhu, 1:518; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ,
663--- which includes the "God is great" peroration typical of an Eid
sermon. The "earlier citation" was §1.28 (which is also said to be part
of §1.45: B 221, 259); the opening lines of §1.28 and §1.52.1 are
similar. 4 The reference is to a pebble (maqlah) placed in a vessel to
ration water among a group of trav- elers; for each person, water was
dripped until it covered the pebble, then he sucked those drops from the
pebble. Ḥ3:333; R 1:273; Gh 1:289. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 176 Text and
Translation
أرجولـکممنثوابهوأخافعليکممنعقابه.وتاللهلوٱنماثتقلوبکمٱنمياثاوسالتعيونکم
منرغبةإليهورهبةمنهدمًاثمّعمّرتمفيالدنياماالدنياباقيةماجزتأعمالـکمولولمتبقوا
دهج نم اً ئيش کم أنعمه عليکم العظام وهداه إيّاکم للإيمان. 1.52.3ومنها في ذ
کر يوم النحر وصفة الأضحيّة ومن تمام الأضحيّة ٱستشراف أذنها وسلامة عينها
فإذا سلمت الأذن والعين سلمت الأضحيّة وتمّت ولو کانت عضباء القرن تجرّرجلها
إلی المنسک. 1.53ومن كلام له عليه السلام
تننظىّتحاهيناثمتعلُخواهيعاراهلسرأدقاهدورومويميهلالبإلاّكادتّيلعاو َ ّكادتف
أنّهم قاتليّ أو بعضهم قاتل بعض لدي ّ . وأ مهلاتق اّلإ ينعسي ينُ تدجو امف
مونلا ينعنم ىّتح هرهظو هنطب رمألا اذه تبّلق دقو الجحود بما جاء به محمّد صل
ّ ى الله عليه وآله. فكانت معالجة القتال أهون عليّ من معالجة العقاب وموتات
الدنيا أهون عليّمن موتات الآخرة. 1.54ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد ٱستبطأ
أصحاب ُ ه إذن َ ه لهم في القتال بصفّين al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 177 angels---all this would be little compared with the
reward I hope for you and the punishment I fear. By God, if your hearts
were to dissolve like salt, if your eyes shed blood in fear and hope,
and if you were permitted to live in this world for as long as it
continues to exist, your deeds---even with supreme toil and
labor---would not repay God's immense favors, or his guidance of you to
faith. 1.52.3 From the same oration, referring to the Eid of Sacrifice,
and describing the requirements of a sacrificial animal: The sacrificial
animal is considered intact if its ears are whole and its eyes are
sound.1 If the ears and eyes are sound, then the sacrificial animal is
considered sound and intact. This is true even if a horn is broken and
the animal drags its foot to the slaughterhouse. 1.53 From an address by
ʿAlī:2 They crowded me like parched camels jostling at the waterhole
when the herder unfastens their hobbling ropes and sets them loose. I
feared they would crush me or each other to death.3
Ihaveturnedoverthismatterinmymindthroughmanysleeplessnightsand concluded
that I can either fight the rebels or repudiate Muḥammad's religion, and
braving war with men sits lighter on me than braving God's punishment,
facing death in this world sits lighter on me than facing death in
eternity. 1.54 From ʿAlī's address to his troops at Ṣiffīn when they
expressed impatience at his reluctance to commence battle:4 1 Lit. "if
its ears stand up" (istishrāf udhunihā), denoting an animal whose ears
are neither slit nor defective. B 271. 2 Referring to the Medinans'
pledge of allegiance to ʿAlī as caliph, after ʿUthmān's death, and to
the breaking of that pledge, either by Ṭalḥah and Zubayr (Ḥ4:6--11), or
by Muʿāwiyah and the Syrians (R 1:275; B 272--273), or by both groups
(Gh 1:297--298). Rāwandī and Baḥrānī add that ʿAlī refers here also to
his initial delay in granting his army permission to fight the Syrians,
explicitly mentioned next in §1.54. Ibn Qutaybah (Imāmah, 1:174) and Ibn
Ṭāwūs (Kashf, 174, 180) cite it as part of a lengthy epistle ʿAlī wrote
after Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr's killing in 38/658. They include §1.30 in
this epistle; see more details in note there. 3 Similar lines in §1.3.4,
§1.135.2, §1.226. 4 37/657. Details of ʿAlī's efforts at reconciliation
in Ḥ4:13--32. Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (ʿIqd, 1:95) and Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 376)
narrate the line (By God, I care not ... confront me!) as a response to
associates who warned him, saying, "Do you fight the Syrians in the
morning, then come out in the evening wearing only a waist-cloth and
cloak?" al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 178 Text and
Translation أمّاقولـكمأكلّ
ذلككراهيةالموتفواللهماأباليدخلتإلىالموتأوخرجالموتإليّ يب قحلت نأ عمطأ
انأو اّلإ اًموي برحلا تعفد ام هللاوف ماشلا لهأ يف ا ً ّكش مكـلوق اّمأو
طائفة فتهتدي بي وتعشو إلى ضوئي أحب ّ إليّمن أن أقتلها على ضلالها وإن كانت
تبوء بآثامها. 1.55ومن كلام له عليه السلام ّ لص هللا لوسر عم اّ نك دقلو ى
الله عليه وآله نقتل آباءنا وأبناءنا وإخواننا وأعمامنا ما يزيدنا
ّودعلاداهجىلعا ً ّدجوملألاضَضَمىلعاًربصومَقَ ّللاىلعاً
ّيضمواًميلستواًناميإاّلإكلذ ولقد كان الرجل منّا والآخر من عدوّنا يتصاولان
تصاول الفحلين يتخالسان أنفسهما أيّهما يسقي صاحبهكأس المنون فمرّة لنا من
عدوّنا ومرّة لعدوّنا منّا فلمّا رأى الله صدقنا .هناطوأاً ئّوبتموهنارجاً
يقلممالسإلاّرقتسٱىّتحرصنلاانيلعلزنأوتبكـلاانّودعبلزنأ اهّنُ بلتحتل هللا ميٱو
دوع ناميإللّرضخٱ الو دومع نيدلل ماق ام متيتأ ام يتأن اّ نك ول يرمعلو دمًا
ولتتبعُنّها ندمًا. 1.56ومن كلام له عليه السلام لأصحابه al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 179 You taunt, "All these excuses to avoid death!" By God, I
care not whether I con- front death or death confronts me! You mock, "Or
perhaps you hesitate to fight the Syrians?" By God, I would not delay
battle even by a day, were it not for the hope that a few may yet
return, to be guided by me, and---although their sight is weak!---to
discern my light.This would please me more than killing them for their
errant ways, notwithstanding they would die yoked to their sins. 1.55
From an address by ʿAlī:1 We fought in support of God's Messenger and
killed our fathers, our sons, our
brothers,andouruncles,2allthewhileincreasinginfaithandacceptance,com-
mitment to the true path, endurance in the face of stinging pain, and
intensity in fighting the enemy. A warrior from our side and another
from the enemy would clash like two stallions to the death, each
attempting to steal the other's life, each offering the other fate's
cup.3 Ours would win in one combat, theirs would prevail in another.
When God saw our true courage, he crushed our
enemyindefeatandsentustriumphantvictory.SowasIslamfounded.Thusdid it
rest its withers and settle into its stall. I swear on my life! If we
had behaved like you, religion would never have been established, belief
would never have blossomed. I swear God's oath! You shall squeeze
calamity's udders and find blood in your pail.4 You shall be dogged
forever by regret. 1.56 From ʿAlī's address to his followers:5 1 ʿAlī
gave this address to his followers, either at Ṣiffīn in 37/657, when
many of his troops, despite being close to winning, pressed him to
accept Muʿāwiyah's truce (B 273), or a year later in Kufa, when
Muʿāwiyah's commander ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Ḥaḍramī attacked neighboring
Basra (Ḥ4:34--53). It is also possible that he spoke similar lines on
more than one occasion. 2 In the Battle of Badr, for example, Ḥamzah ibn
ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib fought and killed Muʿāwi- yah's paternal cousin, who
was also from Ḥamzah's tribe, Shaybah ibn Rabīʿah, and ʿUmar ibn
al-Khaṭṭāb fought and killed his own maternal uncle Hishām ibn
al-Mughīrah. Ḥ4:34. 3 In variousearly battles,for
example,ʿAlīsinglehandedly fought and killed the knownwarriors Walīd ibn
ʿUtbah, Ṭalḥah ibn Abī Ṭalḥah, and ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Wadd. Ḥ4:34. 4
"Milkingblood"isametaphorforthepainfulresultsof thefailureof
ʿAlī'ssupporterstoanswer his call. B 274; Gh 1:305. 5 "The man with a
large maw" is probably Muʿāwiyah, who was a glutton, or, less likely,
Ziyād ibn Abīhi, Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf, or al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah (R
1:276--277; B 275; Ḥ4:54). The full text is narrated by Nuʿaym (Fitan,
1:164) from the Prophet via ʿAlī, and it names the man as Muʿāwiyah. The
second half is placed by Kulaynī (Kāfī, 2:219) on the pulpit of the Kufa
mosque, while it is transcribed by Kūfī (Manāqib, 2:64) as a tag to a
response to a merchant from whom ʿAlī had purchased a shirt. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 180 Text and
Translation امبلطيودجياملكأينطبلاقحدنمموعلُ بلابحرلجريدعبمكيلعرهظيسهّنإامأ
لايجدفٱقتلوهولنتقتلوهألاوإنّهسيأمر كمبسبّيوالبراءةمنّيفأمّاالسب ّ
فسُبّونيفإنّهلي زكاةولـكمنجاةوأمّاالبراءةفلاتتبرّأوامنّيفإن ّ
يولدتعلىالفطرةوسبقتإلىالإيمان والهجرة. 1.57ومن كلام له عليه السلام كلّم
به الخوارج أصابكم حاصب ولا بقي منكم آبر أبعد إيماني بالله وجهادي مع رسول
الله أشهد على نفسي بالـكفر لـ﴿ق َ تْلَ لَض ْد ُ مْلٱ َنِم اَنَأ آَمَو اًذ ِإ ُ هْت
َ دِينَ﴾فأوبوا شرّ مآب وٱرجعوا على ً لماشا ً ّلذيدعبنوقلتسمكّنإامأباقعألارثأ
اوسيفًاقاطعًاوأثرةيتّخذهاالظالمونفيكم سنّة. قوله ⟩ولا بقي منكم آبر⟨يروى
بالراء من قولهم ⟩آبر⟨للذي يأبر النخل أي يصلحه. ويروى ⟩آثر⟨ وهو الذي يأثر
الحديث أي يحكيه ويرويه وهو أصحّ الوجوه عندي كأنّه قال ⟩لا بقي منكم مخـبر⟨.
ويروى ⟩آبز⟨بالزاي معجمة وهو الواثب والهالك أيضًا يقال له آبز. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
181 After me, you will be ruled by a man with a large maw and a massive
belly who swallows all that is in front of him and demands everything
else besides. Kill him! But no, you won't. Listen to me! He will command
you to curse me with vile names and disassociate from me.1 Call me names
if you must---it will be a purge for me and save your life. But never
disassociate from me, for I was born in a pure state of nature,2 and was
the first to believe and migrate.3 1.57 From ʿAlī's address to the
Kharijites:4 May you be wiped out by sandstorms! May your date palms
wither untended! Are you saying I should testify against myself and
confess unbelief? This, after believing in God and fighting alongside
his messenger! «I should stray from the path if so, no longer among the
guided.»5 Return to the hole that you came from! Turn on your heels and
retreat! After me, you face complete humiliation and a cutting sword.
Indeed, despots will make it their custom to attack you and plunder.6
Raḍī: In his line, "May your date palms wither untended (wa-lā baqiya
minkum ābir)," the word ābir, when transmitted with an R, refers to a
person who tends (yaʾburu) date palms, i.e., cultivates them. Another
transmission is "one who narrates a tale (āthir)," i.e., recounts and
transmits it. The latter, in my opinion, is the most viable option.
Accordingly, ʿAlī is saying, "May not one of you remain to carry forward
your report." Yet another transmission is "one who jumps (ābiz)" with a
Z,7 meaning someone who leaps. A dying man is also called ābiz. 1 Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd discusses the Umayyads' commanding people to curse ʿAlī,
often on penalty of death, in three full chapters. Ḥ4:56--114; see also
B 275--276. For additional reports and ref- erences, see Qutbuddin,
Arabic Oration, 85--86. 2 Ar. ʿalā l-fiṭrah, meaning he was born Muslim.
The usage derives from the Prophetic hadith, "Every child is born in the
natural form (كلّ مولود يولد على الفطرة ---)it is his parents who raise
him Christian or Jewish." ʿAlī was "raised by the Prophet in the light
of Islam." Ḥ4:114--116; R 1:277--278; B 275--276. 3 Muslims consider
early conversion and migration a source of honor, indicating dedication
to the Prophet, and participation in setting up the nascent religion. On
ʿAlī being the first male to accept Islam and to migrate with the
Prophet from Mecca to Medina, see Ḥ4:116--128. 4 In Nahrawān, 38/658
(Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:84). Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:193) places these lines in an
oration ʿAlī delivered immediately upon his return to Kufa after
Nahrawān, addressing his supporters. 5 Qurʾan, Anʿām 6:56. 6 Details of
Umayyad-era Kharijite leaders and battles in Ḥ4:132--278, 5:80--129. 7
Both Z and R have the same shape in Arabic orthography, but Z ()زhas a
dot on top, and R ()ر is undotted. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 182 Text and
Translation 1.58 1.58.1ناورهنلارسجاوربعدقموقلا
ّنإهلليقوجراوخلابرحىلعمزعاّ ملمالسلاهيلعلاقو مصارعهم دون النطفة والله لا
يفلت منهم عشرة ولا يهلك منكم عشرة. .اً ّمج اًريثك ناك نإو ءاملا نع ةيانك
حصفأ يهو رهنلا ءام ةفطنلاب ينعي 1.58.2مهعمجأب موقلا كله ليقف مهلتق اّ مل
لاقو كل ّ ا والله إنّهم نطف في أصلاب الرجال وقرارات النساء كلّما نجم منهم
قرن قطع حتّى يكون آخرهم لصوصًا سلّابين. 1.58.3وقال عليه السلام فيهم لا
تقتلوا الخوارج بعدي فليس من طلب الحقّ فأخطأهكمن طلب الباطل فأدر كه. يعني
معاوية وأصحابه. 1.59ةليغلا نم فّوُخ اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو شيطي ال
ذئنيحف ينتملسأو يّنع تجرفنٱ يموي ءاج اذإف ةنيصح ةّنُج هللا نم َ ّيلع ّنإو
السهم ولا يبرأ الكَلْم. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
183 1.58 1.58.1 When ʿAlī expressed his resolve to fight the Kharijites,
he was told, "They have already crossed the river at Jisr al-Nahrawān,"
and he declared:1 Their deaths are written on this side of the clear
water. By God, not ten of them will survive, and not ten of you will be
killed. Raḍī: By "clear water (nuṭfah)," he means the water of the
river, an eloquent metaphor for water, even in large quantities. 1.58.2
Following the battle with the Kharijites, ʿAlī was told, "Every man
among them has been killed," and he declared: No, by God!They hide in
the loins of men and the wombs of women. But when- ever a horn protrudes
from their head, it will be cut off,2 and the last of them will be
thieves and brigands. 1.58.3 ʿAlī also said about them:3 Do not fight
the Kharijites after me, for those who seek right but miss it are not
like those who seek wrong and find it. Raḍī: He means Muʿāwiyah and his
associates. 1.59 From ʿAlī's address, when warned of assassination:4 I
am protected by God's shield. When my day comes, it will leave and hand
me over. Then, the arrow will not miss, and the wound will not heal. 1
Jisr al-Nahrawān (The Bridge of Nahrawān) is the same as Nahrawān
(present-day Sifwah), a town east of the Tigris River in Iraq, the
location of the Battle of Nahrawān between ʿAlī and the Kharijites in
38/658. For details of the place and the battle, see Morony,
"al-Nahrawān," ei2. 2 "Horn" (qarn) is interpreted as leader, and a horn
protruding is a metaphor for the emergence of a leader. B 277; R 1:283;
Ḥ5:73. 3 ʿAlī spoke these words after the Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658.
Ṣadūq, ʿIlal, 218. 4 It is narrated that Ibn Muljam, the Kharijite who
would shortly assassinate ʿAlī, had revealed his intention in Kufa. When
people urged ʿAlī to act, he refused, saying that Ibn Muljam had not yet
perpetrated the crime; then he spoke the words in the text at hand,
thus, in Kufa, in 40/661. B 278--279. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 184 Text
and Translation 1.60ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ألاوإنّ الدنيادارلاي ُ
سلَممنهاإلّافيهاولاي ُ نجابشيءكانلهاٱبتليالناسبهافتنةفماأخذوه منها لها
أُخرجوا منه وحوسبوا عليه وما أخذوه منها لغيرها ق َ دِموا عليه وأقاموا فيه
وإنّها .صقن ىّتح اًدئازو صلق ىّتح اًغباس هارت انْيـَ ب ّلظلا ءيفك لوقعلا يوذ
دنع 1.61ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.61.1وٱتّقوا الله عباد الله وبادروا
آجالـكم بأعمالـكم وٱبتاعوا ما يبقى لـكم بما يزول عنكم اوملعو اوهبتنٱف
مهب حيص اًموق اونوكو مكّـلظأ دقف توملل اوّدعتسٱو مكب َ ّدُج دقف اولّحرتو نيب
امو .ىدس مككرتي ملو اً ثبع مكقلخي مل هللا ّنإف اولدبتسٱف رادب مهل تسيل
ايندلا ّنأ أحد كم وبين الجنّة أو النار إلّا الموت أن ينزل به وإنّ غاية
تنقصها اللحظة وتهدمها الساعة لجديرة بقصر المدّة وإنّ غائبًا يحدوه الجديدان
الليل والنهار لحري ّ بسرعة الأوبة وإنّ قادمًا يقدم بالفوز أو الشقوة لمستحقّ
بأفضل العدّة.
1.61.2فتزوّدوافيالدنيامنالدنياماتحرزونبهنفوسكمغدًا.١فٱتّقىعبدربّهنصحنفسه قدّم
توبته غلب شهوته فإنّ أجله مستور عنه وأمله خادع له والشيطان موكّل به يزي ّ
ن له المعصية ليركبها ويمنّيه التوبة ليسوّفها حتّى تهجم منيّته عليه أغفل ما
يكون عنها. فيا لها حسرة على كلّ ذي غفلة أن يكون عمره عليه حجّة وأن تؤدّيه
أيّامه إلى الشقوة. 1.61.3نسأل الله سبحانه أن يجعلنا وإيّاكم ممّن لا تبطره
نعمة ولا تقصر به عن طاعة ربّه غاية ولا تحلّ به بعد الموت ندامة ولا كآبة.
١م،ھ،وأضيفتفيش،ي:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ي:سقطت ⟩فتزوّدوا ...غدًا⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
185 1.60 From an oration by ʿAlī: Hear me! The world is an abode from
which you cannot be saved except within it, yet no tribute you offer it
will grant you passage beyond its rim. The world tests people with
gifts:Whatever they take from it for worldly benefit they must leave
behind and account for. Whatever they take from it for the next abode
will stay with them forever. To the intelligent, the world is a shifting
shadow--- one moment you see it spreading and the next it has narrowed
to a shard, one moment you see it growing and the next it has
disappeared. 1.61 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.61.1 Be conscious of God,
O servants of God, and outrace your imminent end with good deeds. Trade
transient benefits for everlasting gain, prepare to depart, for the call
has been given, and brace for death, for it hovers overhead. Be those
who wake when shaken, who, knowing that the world is not their
home,seekabetterabode.Godhasnotcreatedyouinvain,norleftyouwithout
direction.2 Nothing stands between you and paradise or hellfire but the
arrival of death. Diminished by each passing moment, demolished by each
pressing hour, your time to the goalpost is short. That traveler, death,
whose camels are steered by Night after Day and by Day after Night will
soon be here. Prepare well for this visitor who will bring you immortal
triumph or unending misery. 1.61.2 Gather provisions in this world from
this world to sustain your souls tomorrow. A servant should fear his
Master and be true to his soul, he should hasten to repent and conquer
his passions, for his lifespan is veiled from him, his long hopes are
false, and he is turned over to Satan, who adorns and encour- ages him
to ride the steed of sin, while coaxing him to delay repentance. When he
least expects it, fate will attack. O what agony for the heedless man!
His life will testify against him, and his days will hand him over to
unending misery. 1.61.3 We beseech Almighty God to include us among
those who are not made insolent by his bounty, fall short in his
obedience, or are seized in death by grief and regret. 1 Additional
parts recorded in Sibṭ,Tadhkirah, 145. Some lines are similar in §1.202;
see note on context there. 2 Modified quotes from Qurʾan, Muʾminūn
23:115, Qiyāmah 75:36. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 186 Text and
Translation 1.62ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.62.1لبق اً رهاظ نوكيو اًرخآ نوكي
نأ لبق اًلّوأ نوكيف اًلاح لاح هل قبست مل يذلا يوق ّلكو ليلذ هريغ زيزع ّلكو
ليلق هريغ ةدحولاب ىّمسم ّلك .اً نطاب نوكي نأ ّ غيره ضعيف وكلّ مالك غيره
مملوك وكلّ عالم غيره متعلّم وكلّ قادر غيره يقدر ويعجز وكلّ سميع غيره ي َ صَمّ
عن لطيف الأصوات وي ُ صِمّهكبيرها ويذهب عنه ما ب َ عُدَ منها وكلّ بصير غيره
يعمى عن خفيّ الألوان ولطيف الأجسام وكلّ ظاهر غيره غير باطن وكلّ باطن غيره
غير ظاهر. 1.62.2لم يخلق ما خلقه لتشديد سلطان ولا تخوّف من عواقب زمان ولا
ٱستعانة على ن ِ دّ مثاور ولا شريك مكاثر ولا ضدّ منافر ولـكن خلائق مربوبون
وعباد داخرون لم أدتبٱامقلخهْدُؤَ يملنئاباهنموهلاقيفاهنع
َأْنَيملونئاكاهيفوهلاقيفءايشألايفللحي ولا تدبير ما ذرأ ولا وقف به عجز عمّا
خلق ولا ولجت عليه شبهة فيما قضى وقدّر بل قضاء متقن وعلم محكم وأمر مبرم
المأمول مع النقم المرهوب مع النعم. 1.63ومن كلام له عليه السلام يقوله
لأصحابه في بعض أيّام صفّين معاشر المسلمين ٱستشعروا الخشية وتجلببوا السكينة
وعضّوا على النواجذ فإنّه أنْبا للسيوف عن الهام وأكملوا اللامة وقلقلوا
السيوف في أغمادها قبل سلّها وٱلحظوا الخزر
وٱطعنواالشزرونافحوابالظبىوصلواالسيوفبالخطى.وٱعلمواأنّكمبعيناللهومعٱبنعمّ
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
187 1.62 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.62.1 No state for God precedes
another state: he is neither first before he is last nor visible before
he is hidden. Other than him, nothing can be described as one.2 Other
than him, the mighty are humble, the strong are weak, mas- ters are
slaves, the learned are students, and the powerful can fail. Other than
him, all observers are blind to subtle colors and ethereal bodies, and
all listen- ers strain to hear faint sounds, are deafened by loud
noises, and miss distant echoes. Other than him, nothing that is visible
is hidden, and nothing that is hidden is visible. 1.62.2 God did not
create us to strengthen his authority or prevent time's blows, nor for
help against an equal's attack, a partner's multitudes, or a mali- cious
adversary. Far from it! We are but subservient mortals and humble ser-
vants. He does not enter into things, so we cannot say that he exists
therein, nor is he distant from them, so we cannot say that he lives
apart. Creating did not tire him, nor directing the universe. Weakness
did not delay his design, nor doubt enter into his decree. His judgment
is perfect, his knowledge exact, his command irrevocable. He is
entreated in times of distress and venerated in times of bounty. 1.63
From ʿAlī's address to his followers on one of the battle days of
Ṣiffīn:3 Muslims! Sheathe yourselves in God's awe and envelop your
bodies with calm. Bite down hard on your back teeth, for that will
deflect the blades that strike at your heads. Wear full armor and rattle
your swords inside their sheaths before you draw them out. Stare down
the enemy and launch your spears from the right and the left. Fight with
your swords and leap into the thrust so that they 1 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
(ʿIqd, 4:163--164) narrates lines from §1.62.2 as part of ʿAlī's Radiant
Oration (Gharrāʾ), §1.80. Ṣadūq (Tawḥīd, 41, 43) places it in Kufa,
after the arbitration in 37/658, as the praise opening for an oration
urging supporters to rally against Muʿāwiyah. 2 Ar. qalīl, translation
after R 1:290, Ḥ5:155. Alternatively explained as anything
understandable in terms of number, unlike God from whom any attribution
is to be removed (B 285); or weak (M 1:330). 3 Narrated by ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-ʿAbbās, who said, "I saw ʿAlī on the battle day of Ṣiffīn, a white
turban on his head, his eyes like two glowing lamps, urging his
followers to fight." (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 416). Either on the day of the
first skirmish in Ṣiffīn, or, more likely, on the penul- timate
battle-day that preceded the final Night of Clamor (laylat al-harīr),
Thursday-Friday 7--8 Ṣafar 37/27--28 July 657. B 289. Further orations
in Ṣiffīn by ʿAlī and others, and poems and events, are recorded in
Ḥ5:175--258. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 188 Text and
Translation رسولاللهصل ّ
ىاللهعليهوآلهفعاودواالـكرّوٱستحيوامنالفرّفإنّهعارفيالأعقابونار ُ جُساً
يشمتوملاىلإاوشمٱواًسفنمكسفنأنعاوبيطو.باسحلاموي حًا.وعليكمبهذاالسواد
الأعظموالرِّواقالمطنّبفٱضربواث َ بَجهفإنّ الشيطانكامنفيكِسرهقدقدّمللوَثْبةيدًا
وأخّر للنكوص رِجل ً ُ هّٰللٱَو َنْوَ لْعَألٱُ مُتنَأَو﴿ ّقحلا دومع مكـل يلجني ىّتح
اًدمص اًدمصف .ا مَعَكُمْ وَل َ َ ـلاَ مْعَأ ْمُكَرِتَ ي ن كُمْ﴾.
1.64مالسلاهيلعنينمؤملاريمأىلإتهتنٱاّ
ملاولاق.راصنألاىنعميفمالسلاهيلعهلمالكنمو أنباء السقيفة بعد وفاة رسول
الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله قال عليه السلام ما قالت الأنصار؟ قالوا قالت
منّا أمير ومنكم أمير. قال عليه السلام فهلّا ٱحتجتم عليهم بأنّ رسول الله صل
ّ ى الله عليه وآله وصّى بأن يُحسَن إلى محسنهم ويتجاوز عن مسيئهم. قالوا وما
في هذا من الحجّة عليهم؟ فقال عليه السلام لو كانت الإمارة فيهم لم تكن
الوصيّة بهم . ثمّقال فما ذا قالت قريش؟ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 189 pierce your foe. Know this: you fight under God's watch,
and alongside his Mes- senger's cousin. Charge forward in attack. Do not
flee the battlefield, for that would dishonor your line for generations
and repay you with hellfire on judg- ment day. Be generous with your
lives and approach death with gentle courage. Aim for the black mass and
the pitched tent. Cut down its center pole, for Satan is hiding in its
flap. He has one hand in front, ready to attack, and one foot at the
back, ready to flee. Charge! Charge! Fight till the pillar of truth
shines bright. «You shall overcome. God is with you, and he will not let
your deeds go to waste.»1 1.64 From observations by ʿAlī regarding the
Allies. After the death of God's Messen- ger, when reports of the
Assembly at the Banū Sāʿidah Portico reached the Commander of the
Faithful, he asked:2 What did the Allies say? Those who had brought the
report replied: The Allies proposed: A commander from our side and
another from yours. ʿAlī responded: Did you not remind them of the
Messenger's directive to recompense those who do good among them and
pardon those who transgress? Those reporting asked: How is that evidence
against their claim? ʿAlī replied: The instruction would not be about
them if they had the right to command. Then he asked: How did the
Quraysh respond? 1 Qurʾan, Muḥammad 47:35. 2 ʿAlī spoke these lines in
Medina, following the death of the Prophet in 11/632, as mentioned in
Raḍī's comments. At this Assembly, immediately after the Prophet
Muḥammad's death, some of his Companions gathered at the Portico
(Saqīfah) of the Banū Sāʿidah and pledged allegiance to Abū Bakr as his
successor. Neither ʿAlī nor anyone else from the Prophet's family was
present; they were preparing for the Prophet's burial. See a summary of
these events in B 292--293; Lecomte, "al-Saḳīfa," ei2; a more detailed
version in Ḥ1:21--61, 6:5--17, and events immediately following in
Ḥ5:17--52. See also ʿAlī's rebuke to Muʿāwiyah regarding this event in
Nahj al-Balāghah, §2.28.2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 190 Text and
Translation قالوا ٱحتجّت بأنّها شجرة الرسول صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله. فقال
عليه السلام ٱحتجّوا بالشجرة وأضاعوا الثمرة. 1.65ّ لَ ق اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل
مالك نمو لتُ قو هيلع تكـلمف رصم ركب يبأ نب دّمحم د ّ لخ امل اهاّيإ هتيّ لو
ولو ةبتع نب مشاه رصم ةيلوت تدرأ دقو ى لهم العَرصة ولا أنهزهم .اً بيبر يل
ناكو اً بيبح ّيلإ ناك دقف دّمحمل ّمذ الب ةصرفلا 1.66ومن كلام له عليه
السلام في ذمّ أصحابه
كمأداريكمكماتدارىالبِكارالعَمِدةوالثِّيابالمتداعيةكلّماحيصتمنجانبتهتّكت
منآخرأكلّماأطلّ ١عليكممَنسِرمنمناسرأهلالشامأغلقكلّ رجلمنكمبابهوٱنجحر ٱنجحار
الضبّة في جحرها والضبع في وجارها الذليل والله من نصرتموه ومن رمى بكم فقد
رمى بأَفْوَق ناصل وإنّكم والله لـكثير في الباحات قليل تحت الرايات وإن ّ ي
لعالم بما يصلحكم ويقيم أَوَدَكم ولـكنّي والله لا أرى إصلاحكم بإفساد نفسي
أضرع الله خدود كم وأتعسجدود كملاتعرفونالحقّ
كمعرفتكمالباطلولاتبطلونالباطلكإبطالـكمالحقّ . ١ش،ن،ي:كذا.م،ھ،ونسخةفيي:
⟩أظلّ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
191 The reporters answered: They argued that they are the Messenger's
tree. ʿAlī exclaimed: They argue for the tree but forget about its
fruit! 1.65 From an address by ʿAlī when his recently appointed
governor, Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, was killed, and Egypt was lost to the
Umayyads:1 My own choice for governor of Egypt was Hāshim ibn ʿUtbah.
Hāshim would not have left a gap for them to enter or an opportunity to
attack. I say this with- out criticizing Muḥammad, whom I loved and
reared.2 1.66 From an address by ʿAlī admonishing his supporters:3 How
long should I coax you and blandish you? How long must I handle you
gingerly as a young camel whose hump a heavy load would crush, or as a
worn garment, patched in one place, and falling apart in another? How is
it that each
manamongyoulocksyourdoorwhenaSyriansquadronapproaches,andholes up in his
home like a lizard in its burrow or a hyena in its den? By God, to gain
you as supporters is to lose! To shoot with you in my longbow is to
shoot an arrow with a broken nock and no arrowhead! By God, you throng
the square, but only a few stand firm under war's banners. I know well
what would lick you into shape and straighten your crookedness---but, by
God, I shall not do this at the cost of demeaning my soul. May God
begrime your faces and destroy your fortunes! You embrace not truth but
falsehood! You reject not falsehood but truth! 1 I have added the words,
"to the Umayyads," for clarity. Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr was killed in
38/658, after the arbitration, when ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣtook over Egypt for
Muʿāwiyah. ʿAlī deliv- ered this address in Kufa (Ṭabarī, Tārīkh,
5:109--110). On the events mentioned in the address, see B 294
(summary); Ḥ6:57--94 (details), Ḥ6:94--100 (text of ʿAlī's full oration
following Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr's death). 2 Muḥammadwasthesonof
AbūBakr,thefirstSunnicaliph,andAsmāʾbintʿUmays.Hisfather died when he
was a child, and ʿAlī, who married Asmāʾ, raised him. R 1:294--295;
Hawting, "Muḥammad b. Abī Bakr,"ei2. 3 Among a number of orations
(including §1.39) that ʿAlī delivered in the wake of Nuʿmān ibn Bashīr's
raid on ʿAyn al-Tamr in 39/659 (Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:195--196; Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 5:133--134). He admonishes them for their reluctance to muster
to fight Muʿāwiyah (B 295). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 192 Text and
Translation 1.67وقال عليه السلام في سحرة اليوم الذي ضُرب فيه ملـكتني عيني
وأنا جالس فسنح لي رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فقلت يا رسول الله ماذا
لقيت من أمّتك من الأود واللدد فقال ٱدع عليهم فقلت أبدلني الله بهم خيرًا لي
.يّنم مهل ا ً ّرش يب مهلدبأو مهنم يعني عليه السلام بـ⟩الأود⟨الاعوجاج
وبـ⟩اللدد⟨الخصام وهذا من أفصح الكلام. 1.68ومن كلام له عليه السلام في ذمّ
أهل العراق أمّا بعد. يا أهل العراق فإنّما أنتم كالمرأة الحامل حملت فلمّا
أتمّت أملصت ومات قيّمها دقلو اً قوس مكيلإ تئج يّنكـلو اًرايتخٱ مكتيتأ ام
هللاو امأ .اهدعبأ اهثروو اهمّيأت لاطو بلغني أنّكم تقولون ي َ َ ـلَ تاق بذك
كم الله فعلى مَن أكذب أعلى الله فأنا أوّل من آمن به أم على نبيّه فأنا أوّل
من صدّقهكل ّ ا والله ولـكنّها لهجة غبتم عنها ولم تكونوا من أهلها ويلُ
ٱمِّهكَيل ً َ تَ لَو﴿ ءاعو هل ناك ول نمث ريغب ا ُ مَ لْع َ بُهَأَبَن َ ّن عْدَحِينٍ﴾.
1.69ومن خطبة له عليه السلام علّم فيها الناس الصلاة على النبيّصل ّ ى الله
عليه وآله al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
193 1.67 ʿAlī spoke these words in the predawn hour of the day in which
he was struck his deathblow:1 Sleep overtook me as I sat, and the
Messenger appeared before my eyes. "Messenger of God," I exclaimed,
"what treachery I have encountered from your community, what hate!" He
replied, "Invoke maledictions on them!" so I prayed, "God, give me
better associates than they, and give them a worse leader than I!" Raḍī:
By "treachery (awad)" he means deceit and by "hate (ladad)" he means
enmity. These are some of the most expressive words ever spoken. 1.68
From an address by ʿAlī censuring the Iraqis:2
Iraqis!Youarelikeapregnantwomanwho,atfullterm,deliversastillbornchild,
thenherhusbanddies,andshelivesforalongtimeasawidow---shediesalone, with
only distant relatives as her inheritors. By God, I did not choose to
come to you! I was forced come to you! I am told that you mutter behind
my back, "He lies!" May God fight you! Who do you accuse me of lying
about? God? I was the first to believe in him! The Prophet? I was the
first to accept his message! Never would I lie about them! But my words
are beyond your comprehension, and you are not worthy to hear them.3 Woe
to your mothers! I gave you a full measure, free of charge. If only
there were vessels to hold it! «You shall surely learn the truth of its
report, but only after a while.»4 1.69 From an oration by ʿAlī in which
he taught his companions how to invoke bless- ings on the Prophet:5 1
Kufa,40/661.Nuʿmān(Sharḥal-akhbār,2:432)namestheaddresseeasal-ḤasanibnʿAlī,along
with some unnamed associates. For details about ʿAlī's assassination,
see Ḥ6:113--126. 2 Excerpt from an oration ʿAlī delivered after Ṣiffīn
in 37/657, presumably in Kufa, chastising his Iraqi fighters who had
agreed to a truce, when, after a hard-fought battle, they were on the
verge of victory. See detailed parsing of the oration's 'pregnant woman'
metaphor in light of these events in B 297; R 1:301; Ḥ6:127--129. 3
According to the commentators, ʿAlī's "manner of speaking that is beyond
the addressees' comprehension" refers to his prophecies about future
events (B 297; Ḥ6:128--134). It could also refer to his orations
explicating the mysteries of theology and metaphysics. 4 Qurʾan, Ṣād
38:88. 5 Ibn Abī Shaybah (Muṣannaf, 6:66) prefaces the prayer with the
tag, "ʿAlī used to recite this supplication," meaning it was ʿAlī's
habitual prayer. Variant rendering in §1.103.3 (see details of context
there; §1.103 is part of a larger oration that also includes §3.26, on
the four pillars of belief, and §3.259). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 194 Text
and Translation
اللّٰهمّداحيالمدحوّاتوداعمالمسموكاتوجابلالقلوبعلىفطرتهاشقيّهاوسعيدها.
اجعلشرائفصلواتكونواميبركاتكعلىمحمّدعبدكورسولكالخاتملماسبقوالفاتح لما
ٱنغلق والمعلن الحقّ بالحقّ والدافع جيشات الأباطيل والدامغ صولات الأضاليل ُ
ق نع لكان ريغ كتاضرم يف اً زفوتسم كرمأب اً مئاق علطضٱف لّمُح امك دم ولا واهٍ
في سباقلا سبق ىروأ ىّتح كرمأ ذافن ىلع اً يضام كدهعل اًظفاح كيحول اً يعاو مزع
وأضاءالطريقللخابطوهديتبهالقلوببعدخوضاتالفتن١وأقامموضحاتالأعلام
ونيّراتالأحكامفهوأمينكالمأمونوخازنعلمكالمخزونوشهيدكيومالدينوبعيثك بالحقّ
ورسولك إلى الخلق. اللّٰهمّ ٱفسح له مفسحًا في ظلّك وٱجزه مضاعفات الخـير من
فضلك. اللّٰهمّ أعل على بناء البانين بناءه وأكرم لديك منزله وأتمم له نوره
وٱجزه من ٱبتعاثك له مقبول الشهادة مرضيّ المقالة ذا منطق عدل وخطّة فصل.
اللّٰهمّ ٱجمع بيننا وبينه في برد العيش وقرار النعمة ومنى الشهوات وأهواء
اللذّات ورخاء الدعة ومنتهى الطمأنينة وتحف الـكرامة. 1.70ومن كلام له عليه
السلام لمروان بن الحكم بالبصرة. قالوا أُخذ مروان بن الح َ كَم أسيرًا يوم
الجمل فٱستشفع الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام
فكلّماه فيه فخل ّ ى سبيله فقالا له يبايعك يا أمير المؤمنين فقال عليه
السلام ١ش،ن،م:كذا.ي،ھ،وهامشم:أضيفت ⟩والإثم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 195 God, unfolder of lands unfolded, creator of skies
elevated, infuser of hearts with their dispositions, blissful or
wretched---Shower your noblest blessings, your manifold graces, on
Muḥammad, your servant and messenger, the seal on what had come before,
opener of all things locked, announcer of the truth in truth, repeller
of the forces of evil, and crusher of the onslaught of error, doing all
this as he was charged to do. He undertook your command and rose to
serve your pleasure, with unfettered boldness and unfaltering resolve.
He comprehended your revelation, safeguarded your compact, and executed
your command, until he had ignited the flame of truth for those who
sought its fire, and illuminated the road for those who stumbled.
Through Muḥammad, hearts were guided after having been enmeshed in
mutiny. He erected clear waymarks and luminous rules. He is the trustee
whom you entrusted with your message, the custodian of your treasure of
knowledge, your witness on judg- ment day, your emissary dispatched with
the truth, and your messenger to the world. God, grant him a spacious
home in your shade and a good reward multiplied by your generosity. God,
let his palace soar above all others, give honor to his station at your
side, and perfect his light.1 Reward him for being an exemplary
messenger, one whose testimonial was accepted and whose words convinced,
who spoke justly and took decisive action. God, unite us with him in a
peaceful afterlife in a blessed abode, every desire satisfied, every
plea- sure granted, in ease, gentleness, and serenity, welcomed with
your gifts of honor. 1.70 From ʿAlī's address to Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam in
Basra. It is reported that when Marwān was taken prisoner at the Battle
of the Camel, he begged Ḥasan and Ḥusayn to intercede for his release
with the Commander of the Faithful. They spoke with their
father,whoansweredthathecouldgofree.Theythenadded,"Commanderof theFaith-
ful, he wishes to pledge allegiance to you," and he replied:2 1 Modified
quote from Qurʾan, Taḥrīm 66:8. 2 36/656. On Marwān and his dealings
with ʿAlī, see Ḥ6:148--165. See also §3.141. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 196 Text
and Translation أفلم يبايعني بعد قتل عثمان لا حاجة لي في بيعته إنّها كف ّ
يهوديّة لو بايعني بيده لغدر بسَبّته أما إنّ له إمرةكل َ عْقة الكلب أَنْفَه وهو
أبو الأَكب ُ ش الأربعة وستلقى الأمّة منه ومن ولده يومًا أحمر. 1.71نامثع
ةعيب ىلع اومزع اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو لقد علمتم أن ّ ي أحقّ الناس
بها من غيري والله لأُسلمنّ ما سلمت أمور المسلمين ولم يكن فيها جور إلّا عليّ
خاصّة ٱلتماسًا لأجر ذلك وفضله وزهدًا فيما تنافستموه من زخرفه وزبرجه.
1.72راشملاب هل ةّيمأ ينب ماهّتٱ هغلب اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو كة في دم
عثمان al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
197 Did he not pledge allegiance to me right after ʿUthmān was killed? I
have no need of his pledge now. His is a Jewish hand!1 If he were to
pledge allegiance to me with his hand, he would break it the next moment
with wind from his arse.2 One day, he will rule, but his rule will only
last for as long as it takes a dog to lick its snout.3 He will also
father four rams.4 At his hand and theirs, Muslims will encounter bloody
death! 1.71 From ʿAlī's address to the Shūrā Council when they resolved
to pledge allegiance to ʿUthmān as the next caliph:5
YouknowfullwellthatIhavemorerighttothecaliphatethananyoneelse.Iwill
concede---but, by God, I will continue to do so only for as long as the
concerns of the Muslims remain unharmed, as long as the injustice is
directed solely at me. I do so in the hope of God's reward and
recompense and in distaste for the adornments and splendors for which
you vie. 1.72 From ʿAlī's address when he heard reports that the
Umayyads were accusing him of complicity in ʿUthmān's killing: 1 The
hand is singled out for mention because a handclasp in that society
sealed one's pledge of allegiance to a ruler. "A Jewish hand" presumably
refers to the pledge given to the Prophet and then broken by the Medinan
Jewish tribes. For a summary of Jews in the Qurʾan and early traditional
Muslim historical works, see Stillman, "Yahūd,"ei2. 2 Lit. "he would
deceive with his arse" (la-ghadara bi-sabbatihi). The commentators
generally read this phrase metaphorically to denote strong censure and
derision, but some also read it literally: Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd says it was
common practice among the Arabs for a man to break wind upon resolving
to break a pledge (!), and Rāwandī notes that "to insult" (sabbahū)
liter- ally means to pierce in the buttocks with a spear. Ḥ6:147; B 302;
R 1:302. 3 Marwān (r. 64--65/684--685) became caliph after the last
Sufyanid-Umayyad caliph, Muʿāwi-
yahii,andhisreignlastedbetweensixandtenmonths.Cf.Bosworth,"Marwānib.al-Ḥakam,"
ei2. 4 The "four rams" are said to be either (1) Marwān's sons: ʿAbd
al-Malik (caliph, r. 65--86/685-- 705), and ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz, Bishr, and
Muḥammad, who ruled respectively as governors of Egypt, Iraq, and the
Arabian Peninsula; or (2) Marwān's grandsons through ʿAbd al-Malik, the
only four brothers to rule as caliph: Walīd (r. 86--96/705--715),
Sulaymān (r. 96--99/715--717), Yazīd (r. 101--105/720--724), and Hishām
(r. 105--125/724--723). B 302; R 1:306--307; Ḥ6:147--148. 5 ʿAlī
delivered this address in Medina following ʿUmar's death in 23/644; I
have added the words "the Shūrā Council" for clarity. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
also notes ʿAlī's citation at this time of several well-known hadith,
including, ⟨For whomsoever I am master, ʿAlī is his master⟩, ⟨You are to
me as Aaron was to Moses⟩, ⟨You are my brother in this world and the
next⟩--- the Shiʿa consider these hadith proof of the Prophet's
appointment of ʿAlī as his successor. Ḥ 6:167--168. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 198 Text
and Translation أولمينهبني أميّةعلمها بي عنق َ هللامهظعو امَ لو يتمهتنع
يتقباس َلاّهجلاعَزَو امَوأيفَ ر امبولاثمألاضرعُ
تهللاباتكىلع.نيباترملاميصخونيقراملاجيجحانأيناسلنمغلبأهب في الصدور تجازى
العباد. 1.73ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ُ حبذخأواندفداشرىلإيعُدوىعوفاً
مكُحعمساًدبعهللامحر جزةهادٍفنجاراقبربّه اًضرغ ىمر اًروذحم بنتجٱو اًروخذم بستكٱ
اً حلاص لمعو اًصلاخ مّدق هبنذ فاخو وأحرز عوضًا كابر هواه و كذّب مناه جعل
الصبر مطيّة نجاته والتقوى عدّة وفاته ركب الطريقة الغرّاء ولزم المحجّة
البيضاء ٱغتنم المهل وبادر الأجل وتزوّد من العمل. 1.74ومن كلام له عليه
السلام إنّ بني أميّة ليفوِّقونني تراث محمّد تفويقًا والله لئن بقيت لهم
لأنفضنّهم نفض اللحّام الوِذام الترِبة. ويروى ⟩التراب الوَذِمة⟨وهو على القلب.
قوله عليه السلام ⟩ليفوّقونني⟨أي يعطونني من المال قليل ً ا قليل ً نم ةّزُ
حلا يهو ةمَذَو عمج⟨ماذولا⟩و .اهنبل نم ةدحاولا ةبلحلا وهو ةقانلا قاوفك ا
الـكَرِش أو الـكبد تقع في التراب فتنفض. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 199 IstheUmayyads'ownknowledgeof
mycharacternotenoughtostopthemfrom injuring me? Is my precedence in
Islam not enough to curb those imbeciles from accusing me? In truth,
God's admonitions are more stirring that any my tongue can produce!1 I
shall confront those who desert the faith and challenge
thosewhodoubt.TheBookof Godresolvesdisputes,andthecontentsof hearts
determine recompense. 1.73 From an oration by ʿAlī: May God have mercy
on the man who listens to wisdom and retains, who is called to guidance
and follows, who clutches the hem of a guide and is saved, who is
mindful of his Lord and fears sin, who carries out acts of purity and
performs good, who earns something to put by and avoids hazardous
terrain, who aims at a target and guards his treasure, who overcomes his
passions and gives the lie to his desires, who makes forbearance the
steed of his salvation and piety the provision for his passing, who
rides on the illuminated path and keeps to the brightened road, who
takes advantage of the respite and hastens to assemble provisions of
good deeds before his life ends. 1.74 From an address by ʿAlī:2 The
Umayyads stingily throw at me my share of Muḥammad's inheritance, piece
by piece, like those who allow a camel calf to suckle its mother only
lightly, at intervals. By God, if I live to show them, I will shake them
up like a butcher shaking dirt off an animal's innards. Raḍī: The phrase
(al-widhām al-taribah), lit. "dirt-coated innards" is also narrated---
in an instance of grammatical inversion---as "innards-coated dirt
(al-turāb al-wadhi- mah)." By saying, "they treat me in the manner of a
camel calf allowed to suckle its mother only lightly at intervals
(la-yufawwiqūnanī)" ʿAlī means: "they give me the money bit by bit like
the fuwāq of a she-camel, which is the quantity from a single milk-
ing." "Widhām (innards)," the plural of wadhamah, is a piece of the
ruminant's stomach or liver; if it falls in the dirt, it must be shaken
clean. 1 I.e., the Qurʾan's warnings against false accusations (Qurʾan,
Aḥzāb 33:58), and its comparison of backbiting to «eating the flesh of
one's dead brother» (Qurʾan, Ḥujurāt 49:12). B 303--304; Ḥ6:170. 2 ʿAlī
spoke these terse lines in Medina in response to a gift sent to him by
Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ, who wasgovernorof Kufainthelatterpartof
ʿUthmān'sreignfrom29--34/649--655.Thisisbecause Saʿīd, in an
accompanying letter, had written to ʿAlī that he had not sent so much to
any other except the caliph himself. B 306; Ḥ6:174. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 200 Text
and Translation 1.75ومن كلمات كان عليه السلام يدعو بها اللّٰهمّ
ٱغفرليماأنتأعلمبهمنّيفإنعدتفعدليبالمغفرة.اللّٰهمّ ٱغفرليماوأيتمن
نفسيولمتجدلهوفاءعندي.اللّٰهمّ ٱغفرليماتقرّبتبهإليكثمّخالفهقلبي.اللّٰهمّ ٱغفر لي
رمزات الألحاظ وسقطات الألفاظ وشهوات الجنان وهفوات اللسان. 1.76اي هل لاقف
جراوخلا ىلإ ريسملا ىلع مزع اّ مل هباحصأ ضعبل هلاق مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو
أمير المؤمنين إن سرت في هذا الوقت خشيت ألّا تظفر بمرادك من طريق علم
النجوم. فقال عليه السلام أتزعم أنّك تهدي إلى الساعة التي من سار فيها صرف
عنه السوء وتخوّف الساعة التي من سار فيها حاق به الضرّفمن صدّقك بهذا فقد كذّب
القرآن وٱستغنى عن الاستعانة بالله في نيل المحبوب ودفع المكروه وينبغي في
قولك للعامل بأمرك أن يوليك الحمد دون ربّه لأنّك بزعمك أنت هديته إلى الساعة
التي نال فيها النفع وأمن الضرّ. ثم أقبل عليه السلام على الناس فقال
أيّهاالناسإيّاكموتعلّمالنجومإلّامايهتدىبهفيبرّأوبحرفإنّهاتدعوإلىالـكهانة.المنجّم
كالكاهن والكاهن كالساحر والساحر كالكافر والكافر في النار. سيروا على ٱسم
الله. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
201 1.75 An excerpt from lines ʿAlī used to intone in supplication:1
God, forgive my sins---you know more about them than I do---and if I
turn back to them, turn to me with forgiveness. God, forgive the
promises I made to myself that you know I have broken. God, forgive the
deeds by which I sought closeness to you that my passions then stopped
me from doing. God, forgive the lapses of my eyes, the blunders in my
words, the errors of my heart, and the slips of my tongue. 1.76 An
address by ʿAlī in response to one of his associates who, when ʿAlī had
resolved to march on the Kharijites, said to him: Commander of the
Faithful, I fear you will not realize your goal if you march at this
time---I know this through my knowledge of the stars.2 Do you presume to
guide me to the hour in which those who advance are shielded from
injury? Do you presume to warn me of the hour in which those
whoadvanceareattackedbyharm?HewhobelievesyouchallengestheQurʾan, he
relies on your help to achieve his wishes and repel his fears, instead
of God's. You may as well instruct him to glorify you and not his Lord,
for in your belief, you are the one who guides him to the hour in which
he will gain benefit and avert harm. ʿAlī then turned to the people and
spoke: People! Beware of studying the stars except to navigate on land
and sea, for it leads to soothsaying. An astrologer is like a
soothsayer, a soothsayer is like a magician, a magician is like an
unbeliever, and an unbeliever will be cast into the Fire. March forward
in God's name! 1 Kulaynī (Kāfī, 4:432--433) writes that this was ʿAlī's
frequent supplication at the Kaʿbah, per- haps during the hajj
pilgrimage, when pilgrims would perform the rite of walking between Ṣafā
and Marwah: "Whenever the Commander of the Faithful climbed atop (the
hill of) Ṣafā, he would face the Kaʿbah, lift up his hands, and intone
(the supplication text)." For further prayers attributed to ʿAlī, see
Ḥ6:178--196 (also includes prayers by Muḥammad and Jesus), ʿAlī,
"Prayers and Supplications," in Quḍāʿī, Dustūr, 176--197; ʿAlī,
al-Ṣaḥīfah al-ʿAlawiyyah, pas- sim. 2 ʿAlī spoke these words in Kufa,
just before the Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
437--438; R 1:315, B 308). According to the commentators, the
"associate" is ʿAfīf ibn Qays, brother of the infamous al-Ashʿath ibn
Qays (R 1:315, B 308). On theological and legal aspects of the
moratorium on astrology, see Ḥ6:200--213; B 308--312. Ibn Ṭāwūs (Faraj
1:58) says the speaker was not ʿAfīf, but an unnamed landowner from
Madāʾin. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 202 Text and
Translation 1.77ومن كلام له عليه السلام بعد فراغه من حرب الجمل في ذمّ
النساء معاشر الناس إنّ النساء نواقص الإيمان نواقص الحظوظ نواقص العقول
فأمّا نقصان إيمانهنّ فقعودهنّ عن الصلاة والصيام في أيّام حيضهنّ وأمّا نقصان
عقولهنّ فشهادة ٱمرأتين منهنّ كشهادة الرجل الواحد وأمّا نقصان حظوظهنّ
فمواريثهنّ على الأنصاف من مواريث الرجال فٱتّقوا شرار النساء وكونوا من
خيارهنّ على حذر ولا تطيعوهنّ في المعروف حتّى لا يطمعن في المنكر. 1.78ومن
كلام له عليه السلام أيّها الناس الزهادة قصر الأمل والشكر عند النعم والورع
عن المحارم فإن عزب ذلك عليكم فلا يغلب الحرام صبر كم ولا تنسوا عند النعم
شكر كم فقد أعذر الله إليكم بحجج مسفرة ظاهرة وكتب بارزة العذر واضحة.
1.79ومن كلام له عليه السلام في صفة الدنيا ما أصف من دار أوّلها عناء
وآخرها فناء في حلالها حساب وفي حرامها عقاب١ من ٱستغنى فيها فتن ومن ٱفتقر
فيها حزن ومن ساعاها فاتته ومن قعد عنها وَاتَتْه٢ ومن أبصر بها بصّرته ومن
أبصر إليها أعمته. اهُمارحو باسح اهُ لالح⟩ :ھ يف ةخسنو ،ش لصأو ،ن .اذك :ش
يف ةحّحصمو ،ھ ،ي ،م١ عقاب⟨. ٢ش،ي،ن،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩آتته⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
203 1.77 From an address by ʿAlī following the Battle of the Camel, in
censure of women:1 People! Women are deficient in faith, deficient in
fortune, and deficient in mind. Their faith is deficient because they
must abstain during menstruation from the rites of prayer and fasting.
Their mind is deficient because the tes- timony of two women counts as
the testimony of one man. Their fortune is deficient because their
inheritance is half that of men. Beware of evil women and be cautious
when dealing with those who are good. Don't obey them even when they
propose a righteous action, so that they don't presume to influence you
to do wrong. 1.78 From an address by ʿAlī: People! To reject worldliness
is to desire little, render thanks for favors, and restrain oneself from
what is forbidden. If that is too much for you, then at least make sure
that illicit temptations do not overwhelm your resistance or forget to
render thanks when you receive favors. God has given you reason enough
to obey him, with bright and clear proofs, and books with plainly
defined argu- ments. 1.79 From an address by ʿAlī describing the world:2
How do I describe a world that begins in weariness and ends in death,
where you are held accountable for approaching what is lawful and
punished for con- suming what is unlawful, where the wealthy are seduced
and the poor grieve? The world eludes those who try to catch her while
she comes willingly to those who pay her no heed. She instructs those
who view her with discernment and blinds those who look at her with
longing. 1 Excerpt from an oration ʿAlī delivered in Basra immediately
after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 85). Though
denigrating women in general terms, it refers particu- larly to
ʿĀʾishah, who had the central role in raising opposition against ʿAlī,
then led an army against him at this battle. Baḥrānī, while emphasizing
the ʿĀʾishah-Camel connection, also
deemsthisstatementtoapplytowomengenerally.IbnAbīal-ḤadīdaddsthattheMuʿtazilites
believe ʿĀʾishah repented and therefore earned a place in paradise (B
312; R 1:316--317; Ḥ6:214-- 221, 224--229, includes the events relating
to ʿĀʾishah and the Battle of the Camel, and her oration). The rulings
regarding women mentioned in the text have their basis in the Qurʾan
(Baqarah 2:282, Nisāʾ 4:11) and Sunnah. Amina Inloes, "Was Imam ʿAli a
Misogynist? The Por- trayal of Women in Nahj al-Balaghah and Kitab
Sulaym ibn Qays," argues that this and similar words attributed to ʿAlī
denigrating women are later insertions. 2 Response to a man who asked
ʿAlī, while he was orating, to describe the world. Ibn ʿAbd Rab- bih,
ʿIqd, 3:119; Karājikī, Kanz, 160. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 204 Text and
Translation وإذا تأمل المتأمّل قوله عليه السلام ⟩من أبصر بها بصّرته⟨وجد
تحته من المعنى العجيب والغرض البعيد ما لا تبلغ غايته ولا يدرك غوره ولا
سيّما إذا قرن إليه قوله ⟩ومن أبصر إليها .اً رهاب اً بيجعو اًرّين اً حضاو⟨اهيلإ
رصبأ⟩و⟨اهب رصبأ⟩ نيب قرفلا دجي هّنإف⟨هتمعأ 1.80ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
وهي من الخطب العجيبة تسمّى الغرّاء 1.80.1الحمد لله الذي علا بحوله ودنا
بطوله مانح كلّ غنيمة وفضل وكاشف كلّ عظيمة وأزل أحمده على عواطف كرمه وسوابغ
نعمه وأومن به أوّلًا باديًا وأستهديه ّ لص اًدمحم ّنأ دهشأو .اًرصان اً يفاكهيلع
لّكوتأو اًرداق اً رهاق هنيعتسأو اًيداه اًبيرق ى الله عليه وآله عبده ورسوله
أرسله لإنفاذ أمره وإنهاء عذره وتقديم نذره. 1.80.2أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى
الله الذي١ ضرب لـكم الأمثال ووقّت لـكم الآجال وألبسكم الرياش وأرفغ لـكم
المعاش وأحاط بكم الإحصاء وأرصد لـكم الجزاء وآثر كم بالنعم السوابغ والرفد
الروافغ وأنذر كم بالحجج البوالغ فأحصاكم عددًا ووظّف لـكم مددًا في قرار خبرة
ودار عبرة أنتم مختبرون فيها ومحاسبون عليها. 1.80.3فإنّ الدنيا رنق مشربها
ردغ مشرعها يونق منظرها ويوبق مخـبرها غرور حائل وضوءآفلوظلّ
زائلوسنادمائلحتّىإذاأنسنافرهاوٱطمأنّ ناكرهاقمصتبأرجلها وقنصت بأحبلها
وأقصدت بأسهمها وأعلقت المرء أوهاق المنيّة قائدة له إلى ضنك المضجع ووحشة
المرجع ومعاينة المحلّ وثواب العمل و كذلك الخلف بعقب السلف لا ١م، ي، ھ،
وأضيفت في ش: كذا. ن، وأصل ش: سقطت ⟩وتقديم نذره أوصيكم عباد الله
بتقوىاللهالذي⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
205 Raḍī:If
apersonweretoponderʿAlī'swords,"Sheinstructsthosewhoviewherwithdis-
cernment (man abṣara bihā baṣṣarathu)," he would find therein a wondrous
meaning and a far-reaching aim whose end he can never attain and whose
depths he can never plumb, especially if he reads them alongside ʿAlī's
next words, "She blinds those who look at her with longing (abṣara
ilayhā aʿmathu)." He will find the difference between
"viewherwithdiscernment"and"lookatherwithlonging"(withthesameverb,abṣara,
but a different prepositional phrase in each, bihā vs ilayhā) splendid
and luminous, wondrous and dazzling. 1.80 From an oration by ʿAlī that
is among his most marvelous, known as Gharrāʾ--- "The Radiant Oration":1
1.80.1 Praise God, exalted in his might and near through his grace,
bestower of gifts and favors and dispeller of calamities and hardships.
I praise him for his compassionate bounty and perfect blessings. I
believe in him---he is the first and the manifest. I seek his
guidance---he is close to me, and he is my guide. I ask him for aid---he
is the vanquisher, the all-powerful lord. I place my trust in him---he
suffices and sustains. I bear witness that Muḥammad is his servant and
messenger, whom he sent to execute his command, vindicate his claim, and
deliver his warning. 1.80.2 Servants of God, I counsel you to be
conscious of God, who has taught you parables and decreed your
lifespans, clothed you in finery and given you a good life, encompassed
you in his reckoning and ordained recompense for your deeds, graced you
with perfect favors and marvelous gifts, and warned you with convincing
arguments. He has reckoned your numbers and appointed your time in this
house of trial and abode of instruction---here you are tested and held
accountable for what you do. 1.80.3 The world's water is murky and the
path to her waterhole thick with mud. Her beauty dazzles but her reality
kills. She is a fleeting deception, a fad- ing light, an ephemeral
shadow, and an unsteady support. When the man who shies away from her
becomes familiar, when he who is wary relaxes, she gallops away at full
stretch, traps him in her snares, targets him with her arrows, and
entangles him in the noose of death. She leads him to a narrow bed and a
place filled with terror, to live in his new home and be paid back for
his deeds. In this 1 Abū Nuʿaym (Ḥilyat, 1:77--79) records §1.80.2, 6,
7, 9 and §1.82.2 as part of an oration ʿAlī declaimed after accompanying
a funeral bier. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 206 Text and
Translation تقلع المنيّةٱخترامًا ولا يرعوي الباقون ٱجترامًا يحتذون مثالًا
ويمضون أرسالًا إلى غاية الانتهاء وصيّور الفناء. 1.80.4حتّى إذا تصرّمت الأمور
وتقضّت الدهور وأَزِف َ النشور أخرجهم من ضرائح القبور وأوكار الطيور وأوجرة
السباع ومطارح المهالك سراعًا إلى أمره مهطعين إلى معاده رعيل ً سوبل مهيلع
يعادلا مهعمسيو رصبلا مهذفني اً فوفص اًمايق اًتومص ا الاستكانة وضرع
الاستسلام والذل ّ ة قد ضلّت الحيل وٱنقطع الأمل وهوت الأفئدة كاظمة وخشعت
الأصوات مهينمة وألجم العرق وعظم الشفق وأرعدت الأسماع لز َبْرة الداعي إلى
فصل الخطاب ومقايضة الجزاء ونكال العقاب ونوال الثواب. 1.80.5عباد مخلوقون
ٱقتدارًا ومربوبون ٱقتسارًا ومقبوضون ٱحتضارًا ومضمّنون
أجداثًاوكائنونرفاتًاومبعوثونأفرادًاومدينونجزاءومميّزونحسابًاقدأمهلوافيطلب
المخرج وهدوا سبيل المنهج وعمّروا مهل المستعتب وكشفت عنهم سدف الريب وخلّوا
لمضمار الجياد ورويّة الارتياد وأناة المقتبس المرتاد في مدّة الأجل ومضطرب
المهل.
1.80.6فيالهاأمثالًاصائبةومواعظشافيةلوصادفتقلوبًازاكيةوأسماعًاواعيةوآراء
عازمة وألبابًا حازمة. فٱتّقوا الله تقيّة من سمع فخشع وٱقترف فٱعترف ووجل
فعمل باتفعجاروبانأفباجأورجدزٱفرّذُحوربتعٱفرّبُ عونسحأفنقيأوردابفرذاحو ةريرس
باطأو ةريخذ دافأف اًبراه اجنو اً بلاط عرسأف ىآرف يرُأو ىذتحٱف ىدتقٱو وعمر
معادًا وٱستظهر زادًا ليوم رحيله ووجه سبيله وحال حاجته وموطن فاقته وقدّم
أمامه لدار مقامه. فٱتّقوا الله عباد الله جهة ما خلقكم له وٱحذروا منهكُنْه
ما حذّر كم من نفسه وٱستحِقّوا منه ما أعدّ لـكم بالتنجّز لصدق ميعاده والحذر من
هول معاده. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
207 way, sons follow fathers. Death keeps cutting off lives, and people
keep sinning. They follow the example of those who went before and
advance, one herd after another, to the final end---the threshold of
annihilation. 1.80.4 Then, when affairs conclude, eons run their course,
and the resurrec- tion draws near, God plucks people from the recesses
of graves, from the nests of birdsandthedensof
beasts,andfromeverypitdeathhascasttheminto,and
theyhastentoanswerhiscommand.Theyrushtohiminsilenttroops,standing
uprightinstraightrows,theeyepiercesthemandthecallerforcesthemtoheed his
call, clad in garments of submission, suckling the unholy milk of
humilia- tion and shame. Ruses have vanished, hope is lost, hearts are
gripped by terror, voices are hushed and mute, throats choke on sweat
like a camel chokes on its bridle-straps, dread pervades, and ears are
deafened by the thunderous call to judgment, to the payment for past
deeds, be it punishment or reward. 1.80.5 All are God's servants,
created by his power and ruled by his might.They will be seized by
death, thrown into graves, transformed into dry bones, and resurrected
alone, they will be held accountable for their deeds and singled out for
the reckoning. They were given time to seek a way out and were guided to
the beaten path, they had a lifetime to take warning and were led out
from the shadows of doubt, they were left free to train for the race and
contemplate their purpose, to seek a lighted torch and the promised
goal. All this they could have done in their allotted time, in the
respite granted for action. 1.80.6 What striking parables, what healing
counsels! If only they fell on atten- tive ears, pure hearts, resolute
minds, and mature intellects! People, be con- scious of God in the
manner of one who, when he hears the call, prostrates; if he sins, he
confesses; because he fears, he does good; because he dreads, he
hastens; attaining certainty, he is virtuous; given lessons, he takes
heed; when warned, he recoils; in answering, he returns; if he
regresses, he repents; when he emulates, he perseveres; and when shown
the way, he perceives. In doing so, he races when he seeks and is saved
when he flees. Thus, he amasses a trea- sure, purifies his heart,
prepares for the return, and gathers provisions for his day of
departure, his time on the road, his moment of need, and his state of
want. He readies stocks for his final abode. Servants of God! Be
conscious of him and attend to the purpose he created you for. Be afraid
of him with regard
tothethinghewarnedyoutofearhimfor.Deservethefulfilmentof hispromise.
Beware the terror of the return. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 208 Text and
Translation 1.80.7منها جعل لـكم أسماعًا لتعي ما عناها وأبصارًا لتجلو عن
عشاها وأشلاء جامعة لأعضائها ملائمة لأحنائها في تركيب صورها ومُدُد عُم ُ رها
بأبدان قائمة بأرفاقها وقلوب رائدة لأرزاقها في مجلّلات نعمه وموجبات مننه
وحواجز عافيته.١ وقدّر لـكم أعمارًا سترها عنكم وخلّف لـكم عبرًا من آثار
الماضين قبلـكم من مستمتع خلاقهم ومستفسح خناقهم أرهقتهم المنايا دون
الآمال وشذّبهم عنها تخرّم الآجال لم يمهدوا في سلامة الأبدان ولم
يعتبروافيأُن ُ فالأوان.فهلينتظرأهلب َ ضاضةالشبابإلّاحَوانيالهرموأهلغضارة
الصحّة إلّا نوازل السقم وأهل مدّة البقاء إلّا آونة الفناء مع قرب الزِّيال
وأزوف ةدفحلا ةرصنب ةثاغتسالا تّفلتو ضرجلا صصغو ضضملا ملأو قلقلا زَ لَ عو
لاقتنالا والأقرباء والأعزّة والقرناء. 1.80.8فهل دفعت الأقارب أو نفعت
النواحب وقد غودر في محل ّ اً نيهر تاومألا ة وفي ضيق المضجع وحيدًا قد هتكت
الهوامّ جلدته وأبلت النواهك جدّته وعفت العواصف آثاره ومحا الحدثان معالمه
وصارت الأجساد شحِبة بعد ب َ ضّتها والعظام نخِرة
بعدقوّتهاوالأرواحمرتهنةبثقلأعبائهاموقنةبغيبأنبائهالاتستزادمنصالحعملهاولا
تستعتب من سيّء زللها. أولستم أبناء القوم والآباء وإخوانهم والأقرباء
تحتذون أمثلتهم
وتركبونقِدّتهم٢وتطؤونجادّتهمفالقلوبقاسيةعنحظّهالاهيةعنرشدهاسالـكة في غير
مضمارها كأنّ المعنيّسواها وكأنّ الرشد في إحراز دنياها. 1.80.9وٱعلموا أنّ
مجاز كم على الصراط ومزالق دحضه وأهاويل زللـه وتارات أهواله فٱتّقوا الله
تقيّة ذي لب ّ شغل التفكّر قلبه وأنصب الخوف بدنه وأسهر التهجّد غِرار نومه
وأظمأ الرجاء هواجر يومه وظلف الزهد شهواته وأوجف الذ كر بلسانه وقدّم الخوف
١م، ن، ونسخة في ش: كذا. نسخة في م: ⟩بليّته⟨. أصل ش: ⟩وجوايز عافيته⟨، وفي
الهامش مع علامة التصحيح ⟩وحواجز بليّته⟨. ي: ⟩وحواجز بليّته وجوائز عافيته⟨.
ھ: ⟩وحوائز عافيته وحواجزبليّته⟨. ٢م،ن،ھ:كذا.ش،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ: ⟩ق َ ذّتهم⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
209 1.80.7 From the same oration: God has given you ears to hear what
they should, eyes to dispel blindness, and a
torsothatenclosesorgansandismoldedontoribs;hehasdividedyourforms--- for
use through a long life---into bodies that can attend to their needs,
and hearts that can seek out their sustenance; he has given you these
and many more splendid blessings, binding favors, and shelters of health
and well-being; he has fixed your lifespans and concealed their
duration. All the while, he has presented you with lessons in the tales
of the people who went before you, who enjoyed good fortune and roamed
with loosened halters, until fate over- took them and cut off their
false hopes, and the termination of their lifespan drove them from their
desires, who neglected to provide for themselves when their bodies were
sound, nor heed life's lessons while there was time to choose. Think:
Can the youth with rosy skin expect anything but the bowed back of old
age? The man of fresh health anything but the hard blows of sickness?
The liv- ing anything but the moment of perdition, the imminence of
separation, the approach of dislocation, the insomnia of anxiety, the
pain of burning grief, the throttle of the death rattle, and the futile
appeal for help to grandchildren and relatives, friends and colleagues?
1.80.8 Can relatives ward off the ordeal, or wailing women avail, when
the deceased are pledged to the dead man's quarter, when they lie alone
in the grave? Maggots tear into their skin and the elements corrode
their freshness. Storms erase their traces and routines obliterate their
signs. Bodies once rosy of skin decay, and bones once strong desiccate.
Souls, mortgaged to their bur- dens, now see the reality of the unseen.
But the time to stock deeds is past, or to atone for transgressions. Are
you not the children of the dead, their fathers, their brothers, their
relatives? Do you not follow in their footsteps? Do you not walk their
road and tread their path? But your hardened hearts cannot absorb a
share of belief. You run in the wrong race, too preoccupied to discern.
You behave as though someone else is the next target, as though wisdom
lies in amassing wealth. 1.80.9 But know this: You too must cross the
bridge of death, with its slippery surface, horrifying stumbles, and
repeated terrors. So be conscious of God in the manner of a sage whose
heart is deep in thought and whose body is ema- ciated by fear; whose
snatches of sleep in the watches of night are interrupted by prayer, and
whose hope for reward makes him choose thirst in the scorching hoursof
theday;whosepassionsrenunciationdampens,whosetongueremem- brance spurs
on, and who fears God as he should, in order to obtain God's shelter;
who shuns deviation from the straight path, and traverses the middle
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 210 Text and
Translation لأمانه وتنكّب المخالج عن وَض َ ح السبيل وسلك أقصد المسالك إلى
النهج المطلوب ولم ت َ فْتِلهفاتلاتالغرورولمت َ ىمعنلاةحاروىرشبلاةحرفباً
رفاظرومألاتاهبتشمهيلعَمْع في أنعم نومه وآمن يومه قد عبر معبر العاجلة حميدًا
وقدّم زاد الآجلة سعيدًا وبادر من وجل وأكمش في مهل ورغب في طلب وذهب عن هرب
وراقب في يومه غده ونظر ق ُ
دْمًاأمامه.فكفىبالجنّةثوابًاونوالًاوكفىبالنارعقابًاووبالًاوكفىباللهمنتقمًاونصيرًا
وكفى بالكتاب حجيجًا وخصيمًا. 1.80.10أوصيكم بتقوى الله الذي أعذر بما أنذر
وٱحتجّ بما نهج وحذّر يف ذفن ا ً ّودع مك ّ يزو ىّنمف دعوو ىدرأو ّلضأف اً ّيجن
ناذآلا يف ثفنو اً ّيفخ رودصلا ن سيّئات الجرائم
وهوّنموبقاتالعظائمحتّىإذاٱستدرجقرينتهوٱستغلقرهينتهأنكرمازي ّ نوٱستعظم ما
هوّن وحذّر ما آمن. 1.80.11منها في صفة خلق الإنسان اً قاحُم ةقلعو ١اً قاهِد
ةفطن راتسألا فغشو ماحرألا تاملظ يف هأشنأ يذلا اذه مأ مهفيل اًظحال اًرصبو
اًظفال اًناسلو اًظفاح اً بلق هحنمّمث اًعفايو اًديلوو اًعضارو اً نينجو معتبرًا
ويقصر مزدجرًا حتّى إذا قام ٱعتداله وٱستوى مثاله نفر مستكبرًا وخبط سادرًا
ةّيزر بستحي ال هبرأ تاودبو هبرط تاّذل يف هايندل اً يعس اًحداكهاوه برغ يف اً
حتام ولا يخشع تقيّة. 1.80.12فمات في فتنته غريرًا وعاش في هفوته يسيرًا لم
يفد عوضًا ولم يقض مفترضًا تارمغ يف اً رهاس تابو اًرداس ّلظف هحارَم ننَسو هحامج
رَ ّبُ غ يف ةّينملا تاعجف هتمهد الآلام وطوارق الأوجاع والأسقام بين أخ شقيق
ووالد شفيق وداعية بالويل جزعًا
ولادمةللصدرقلقًا.والمرءفيسكرةملهيةوغمرةكارثةوأنّةموجعةوجذبةمكربةوسوقة .⟨اً
قافد⟩ :ھيفةخسنو،شيفةحّحصمو،م.اذك:شلصأو،ھ،ي،ن١ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 211 road to reach his goal; whom delusion's snares do not
entangle and dubious affairs do not blind. Such a man wins promised
delights and blessed repose, a tranquil sleep, and a day of safety. He
has crossed the bridge exemplarily, and arriving at the provisions he
had sent on, he exults. Because he feared, he has- tened; when given a
chance, he labored; seeking, he hoped; fleeing, he dodged; in his
present, he was mindful of the morrow; with courage, he looked ahead. O
people, take heed: paradise suffices as reward and recompense, hellfire
as pun- ishment and penalty. God suffices as avenger and bestower of
victory, his Book as interlocutor and adversary. 1.80.10 I counsel you
to be conscious of God, who alerted when he cautioned, and justified his
claim when he showed you the way. He warned you against the enemy who
steals into breasts with stealth, and whispers into ears in secret; who
misguides and leads into hell, and promises with vows that are false;
who makes the evilest of crimes look attractive, and trivializes
terrible sins---then, when he has deceived your soul and secured your
collateral, he pronounces repulsive what he had bedecked and grave what
he had dismissed, and he threatens you with the very things from which
he had promised safety. 1.80.11 From the same oration, describing the
creation of humans: Look at this human, whom God created in the darkness
of the womb, in layers of coverings, whom he transformed from a drop of
gushing semen to a formless blood-clot, then to a fetus, a suckling
babe, a child, and a youth. God bestowed on the human a heart that can
remember, a tongue that can speak, and eyes that can see, so that he may
learn when taught and refrain when admonished. But then, when he
attained a balanced figure and his body stood up straight, he turned
away in arrogance and bucked like a sun-struck camel, toiling only for
worldly gain, and drawing up huge buckets from the deep wells of his
pas- sions. Seeking only ecstatic pleasures and wishful fancies, he
neither heeded the approaching menace nor humbled himself before God.
1.80.12 And so he died pursuing pleasure, having lived for a moment,
jolly in his sins, then leaving without fulfilling obligations or
earning reward. Sudden fate attacked him as he galloped headstrong in
his merry path.That day, he col- lapsed like a sun-struck camel, that
night, he lay tortured by agonies of pain and convulsions of illness.
Onlookers---a blood brother, a doting father, one woman crying woe,
another beating her chest---stood by. Then he was seized by consuming
paroxysms, intense distress, and painful groans, in an excruciat- ing
extraction and a most severe end. Then he was wrapped in the cloths of a
shroud and moved hither and thither, passive at all times and
submissive.Then al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 212 Text and
Translation متعبةثمأدرجفيأكفانهمُبل َ
سًاوجُذبمنقادًاسلسًاثمّألقيعلىالأعوادرجيعوَصَب ون ِ ض ْ و سقم تحمله حفدة
الولدان وحشدة الإخوان إلى دار غربته ومنقطع زورته حتّى َ تْهَبل اً ّيجن هترفح
يف دعقأ عّجفتملا عجرو عّيشملا فرصنٱ اذإ ة السؤال وعثرة الامتحان. وأعظم ما
هنالك بليّة نزل الحميم وتصلية الجحيم وفورات السعير لا فترة مريحة ولا دعة
مزيحة ولا قوّة حاجزة ولا موتة ناجزة ولا سِنة مسلية بين أطوار الموتات وعذاب
.نوذئاع هللاب اّنإ ١﴾نوُعِجاَرِهْيَ ل ِإ آـَ ّن ِإَوِهّٰلِ ل اَ ّن ِإ﴿ تاعاسلا 1.80.13َ
لف اورظنُأو اومهفف اومّ لُ عو اومِعنف اورّمُع نيذلا هللا دابع هُوا وسلموا فنسوا
أُمهلوا طويل ً ا ومنحوا جميل ً بويعلاو ةطّروملا بونذلا اورذحا .اًميسج
اودعوو اً ميلأ اورّذحو ا المسخطة أولي الأبصار والأسماع والعافية والمتاع هل
من مَناص أو خلاص أو معاذ َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ نَأف﴿ .ال مأ ٍراحَم وأ ٢رارف وأ ذالم وأ
كُونَ﴾أم أين تصرفون أم بماذا تغترّون وإنّما حظ ّ أحد كم من الأرض ذات الطول
والعرض قِيْدُ ق َ دابع نآلا .هّدخ ىلع اً رفعنم هِّد َ هَموداسجألاةحاروداشرإلاةنْيَ
فيفلسرمحورلاولمهمقانخلاوهللا لالبقيّةوأُن ُ ف
المشيّةوإنظارالتوبةوٱنفساحالحوبةقبلالضنكوالمضيقوالروعوالزهوقوقبلقدوم
الغائب المنتظر وأخذة العزيز المقتدر. 1.80.14نويعلا تكبو دولجلا اهل
تّرعشقٱ ةبطخلا هذهب بطخ اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هّنأ ربـخلا يفو ورجفت القلوب. ومن
الناس من يسمّي هذه الخطبة الغرّاء. تطقس:ي،ن.⟨﴾نوُعِجاَرِهْيَ ل ِإآـَ ّن ِإَوِهّٰلِ لاَ
ّن ِإ﴿ونوذئاعهللاباّنإ⟩ :ھ.اذك:شيفتفيضأو،م١ الآيةالقرآنيّة.
٢ن،ي،ش،ھ:كذا.م:أضيفت ⟩أومجاز⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
213 his body, emaciated by disease and destroyed by illness, was tossed
on a plank, and carried by his sons' children and his brothers'
attendants to the house of exileandthestateof
separation.Finally,whenthosewhohadcometoburyhim had turned back and the
grieving mourners had gone away, he was made to sit up alone in his tomb
to face a frightening interrogation and a terrible ordeal. People, know
that the afterworld's greatest torment is the Pit-of-Boiling-Liquid, the
Blaze-of-Hellfire, the Conflagration-of-the Inferno.1 It allows no
period of rest, no alleviating respite, no shielding force, no soothing
sleep, and no relief in a final death. This is all there is: death after
death and hour after hour of tor- ture. «Indeed, we belong to God, and
to him we shall return.»2 Truly, in God we seek refuge. 1.80.13 Servants
of God! You were given long lives that you enjoyed, knowl- edge that
helped you understand, respite that you squandered in play, and security
that made you careless. You were given a long reprieve and beautiful
gifts, warned of punishments, and promised rewards. Bearers of eyes and
ears, health and wealth, beware of sins that hurl into the abyss, and
transgressions that incur God's wrath! Do you see escape, deliverance,
refuge, shelter, retreat, or return? No?Well, then, «how are you
deluded,»3 where are you directed, and what is deceiving you? Your share
of the world, in all its length and breadth, is but the measure of your
body as it lies with cheek in the dust! Servants of God! Take heed now,
this very moment, while halters remain loosened and spirits untethered,
while you have time to seek guidance and a body that is sound, with a
remainder in your respite, the freedom to choose, a chance to repent,
and room to move. Take heed before the calamity descends and straits
narrow, before fear prevails and destruction sets in, before the arrival
of that visitor who will surely arrive, and before you are seized by the
Powerful, Almighty Lord. 1.80.14 Raḍī: The report goes on to state that
when ʿAlī delivered this oration, bod- ies shuddered, eyes wept, and
hearts trembled. Some people name this Gharrāʾ, "The Radiant Oration." 1
Modified quote from Qurʾan, Wāqiʿah 56:93--94. 2 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:156.
3 Qurʾan, Anʿām 6:95, Yūnus 10:34, Fāṭir 35:3, Ghāfir 40:62. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 214 Text and
Translation 1.81ومن كلام له عليه السلام في ذ كر عمرو بن العاص ّ نأو
ةباعُد ّيف ّنأ ماشلا لهأل معزي ةغبانلا نبٱل اً بجع دقل سرامأو سفاعأ ةباعْلِ
ت ؤرمٱ ي قال باطل ً َ يو فلخيف دعيو بذكيف لوقيل هّنإ بذكـلا لوقلا ّرشو
امأ اً مثآ قطنو ا سأل ُ يو فحلُ يف سأل فيبخل ويخون العهد ويقطع الإلّ فإذا
كان عند الحرب فأي ّ زاجر وآمرهو ما لم تأخذ السيوفمآخذها فإذا كان ذلك كان
أكبر١ مكيدته أن يمنح القوم سَبّته. أما والله إن ّ ي ليمنعني من اللعب ذ كر
الموت وإنّه ليمنعه من قول الحقّ نسيان الآخرة إنّه لم يبايع معاوية حتّى شرط
له أن يؤتيه أتيّة ويرضخ له على ترك الدين رضيخة. 1.82ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام 1.82.1وأشهدأنلاإل ٰ
هإلّااللهوحدهلاشريكلهالأوّللاشيءقبلهوالآخرلاغايةله
لاتقعالأوهاملهعلىصفةولاتعقدالقلوبمنهعلىكيفيّةولاتنالهالتجزئةوالتبعيض ولا
تحيط به الأبصار والقلوب. 1.82.2منها فٱتّعظوا عباد الله بالعبر النوافع
وٱعتبروا بالآي السواطع وٱزدجروا بالنذر البوالغ وٱنتفعوا بالذ كر والمواعظ
فكأن قد علقتكم مخالب المنيّة وٱنقطعت منكم علائق الأمنيّة ١م،ي:كذا.ن،ش،ھ:
⟩أكثر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
215 1.81 From ʿAlī's address about ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ:1 How strange! The
Harlot's son tells the Syrians that I have a streak of foolish-
ness,thatIamajokerinterestedonlyinfrolicsandflirtation!Hespeaksuntruth
and gives voice to sin, for lies are the evilest of words. When he
speaks, he lies, when he promises, he breaks his promise, when he
solicits, he badgers---but when he himself is solicited, he is stingy,
he betrays his pledge and disowns his kin. When battle approaches, how
boldly he chides and commands!---but only before swords reap their
harvest, then, his best strategy is to show people his arse!2 By God,
the thought of death stops me from indulging in frivolities, while
disregard for the hereafter stops him from speaking the truth. In fact,
he pledged allegiance to Muʿāwiyah only after he had elicited from him a
promise of payment---a paltry bribe of baubles in exchange for
abandoning the faith. 1.82 From an oration by ʿAlī:3 1.82.1 I bear
witness that there is no god but God, who has no partner. He is the
first, for there was nothing before him, and the last, for he has no
end. Minds cannot find a way to describe him, hearts cannot comprehend
his nature, dis- secting or deconstructing cannot grasp him, and eyes
and hearts cannot take him in. 1.82.2 From the same oration: Servants of
God! Take counsel from valuable lessons, warning from blazing signs,
caution from powerful warnings, and benefit from reminders and coun-
sels! Imagine that death's talons have pierced you and hope's threads
are sev- ered, that calamitous events have crushed you, and fate has
driven you to the waterhole that is common to all. «Each soul is
accompanied by its driver and 1 Thaqafī (Ghārāt, 2:513) states that this
oration was delivered on the pulpit. Nuʿmān (Manāqib, 273) places the
text in Iraq. ʿAmr's mother was infamous in the pre-Islamic period as
"The Harlot" (nābighah, lit. "the woman who shows herself," B 335; Gh
1:415). During the month in which she conceived ʿAmr, it is reported
that she had lain with five men---Abū Lahab ibn
ʿAbdal-Muṭṭalib,UmayyahibnKhalaf
al-Jumaḥī,Hishāmibnal-Mughīrahal-Makhzūmī,Abū Sufyān ibn Ḥarb, and
al-ʿĀṣibn Wāʾil al-Sahmī---and each of them claimed him as his son. She
chose ʿĀṣas the father because he supported her financially, although
ʿAmr resembled Abū Sufyān more (Ḥ6:283; Gh 1:415). ʿAmr's words about
ʿAlī having "a streak of foolishness" (duʿābah) echoed a criticism
earlier voiced by ʿUmar (Ḥ6:326--330). 2 In one of the battle days of
Ṣiffīn, ʿAmr came face to face with ʿAlī, and when ʿAlī was about to
strike him, he exposed his private parts, and ʿAlī turned away. Idrīs,
ʿUyūn, 3:244--246. 3 §1.82.2 (also §1.80.2, 6, 7, 9) are recorded by Abū
Nuʿaym (Ḥilyat 1:77--79) as part of an oration ʿAlī declaimed after
accompanying a funeral bier. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 216 Text and
Translation َ ن ُ ّلُك﴿و دوروملا درولا ىلإ ةقايسلاو رومألا تاعظفم مكتمهدو
ِ ئآَس اَهَع َ ّم ٍسْف قٌ وَش َ هِيدٌ﴾سائق يسوقها إلى محشرها وشاهد يشهد عليها
بعملها. 1.82.3منها في صفة الجنّة درجات متفاضلات ومنازل متفاوتات لا ينقطع
نعيمها ولا يظعن مقيمها ولا يهرم خالدها ولا يبأس ساكنها. 1.83ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام 1.83.1قد علم السرائر وخبر الضمائر له الاحاطة بكلّ شيء والغلبة
لكلّ شيء والقوّة على كلّ شيء.
1.83.2فليعملالعاملمنكمفيأيّاممهلهقبلإرهاقأجلهوفيفراغهقبلأوانشغلهوفي
متنفّسه قبل أن يؤخذ بكظمه وليمهّد لنفسه وقدمه وليتزوّد من دار ظعنه لدار
إقامته. 1.83.3فالله َالله َأيّها الناس فيما ٱستحفظكم من كتابه وٱستودعكم
من حقوقه فإنّ الله راثآ ىّمس دق ىمع الو ةلاهج يف مكعدي ملو ىدس مككرتي ملو
اً ثبع مكقلخي مل هناحبس كم وعلم أعمالـكم وكتب آجالـكم وأنزل عليكم الكتاب
تبيانًا وعمّر فيكم نبيّه أزمانًا حتّى أكمل له ولـكم فيما أنزل من كتابه الذي
رضي لنفسه وأنهى إليكم على لسانه محابّه من الأعمال ومكارهه ونواهيه وأوامره
فألقى إليكم المعذرة وٱتّخذ عليكم الحجّة وقدّم إليكم بالوعيد وأنذر كم بين
يدي عذاب شديد. فٱستدركوا بقيّة أيّامكم وٱصبروا لها أنفسكم فإنّها قليل
فيكثيرالأيّامالتيتكونمنكمفيهاالغفلةوالتشاغلعنالموعظةولاترخّصوالأنفسكم
فتذهب بكم الرخص مذاهب الظلمة ولا تداهنوا فيهجم بكم الإدهان على المعصية.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
217 its witness»1---a driver who steers it to the place of accounting,
and a witness who testifies to its deeds. 1.82.3 From the same oration
describing paradise: It has distinct ranks and diverse stations. Its
blessings never end, its residents never leave, its occupants never age,
and its inhabitants never want. 1.83 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 1.83.1
God knows your thoughts and discerns your feelings, he encompasses all
things, subjugates all things, and controls all things. 1.83.2 Do good
in your time of respite before the end of your lifespan, in your time of
leisure before other things preoccupy you, in the time you draw breath
before your throat chokes. Provide for your soul and secure it a high
rank. Take provisions from the home you will leave for the home you will
reside in forever. 1.83.3 People! Fear God in this: guard his Book,
which he has asked you to pre- serve, and uphold his rights, which he
has asked you to hold in trust. He has not created you in vain, nor left
you without direction,3 nor ignorant and blind. He records your acts and
knows what you do, and he has decreed what your lifespan will be.
Sending you the Book with its clear exposition,4 God let his Prophet
live among you through numerous seasons, until, by what he revealed in
his Book, he perfected for him and for you the faith he was pleased to
call his own.5 Expressing approvals and disapprovals on his Prophet's
tongue, as well as prohibitions and commands, God justified his claim to
you, placed his proof before you, advanced his warning to you, and
cautioned you of imminent and
harshchastisement.People,useyourremainingdaystorectifyyourwrongsand
devote yourselves to that task, for your remaining days are few compared
to the many you have squandered carelessly and in total neglect of
admonition. Don't give yourselves undue license for that will lead you
down the path of tyrants, don't be duplicitous for that will steer you
into sin. 1 Qurʾan, Qāf 50:21. 2 §1.83.3 (and §1.171.2) are recorded by
Minqarī (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 10) and Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī (Akhbār,
152--153) as part of ʿAlī's first Friday sermon in Kufa (36/656).
§1.83.4 is recorded by Ḥarrānī (Tuḥaf, 150) as part of "The Brocade
(Dībāj) Oration," also recorded in §1.107; Mufīd (Amālī, 206) prefaces
this section with "ʿAlī used to say." 3 Modified quotes from Qurʾan,
Muʾminūn 23:115, Qiyāmah 75:36. 4 Modified quote from Qurʾan, Naḥl
16:89. 5 Modified quote from Qurʾan, Māʾidah 5:3. I have added the word
"faith" (Ar. dīn) from the Qurʾanic verse to clarify the reference and
meaning. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 218 Text and
Translation 1.83.4عباداللهإنّ أنصحالناسلنفسهأطوعهملربّهوإنّ
أغشّهملنفسهأعصاهملربّه والمغبون من غبن نفسه والمغبوط من سلم له دينه
والسعيد من وُعظ بغيره والشقيّ من ٱنخدع لهواه وغروره. وٱعلموا أنّ يسير
الرياء شرك ومجالسة أهل الهوى منساة للإيمان ومحضرة للشيطان. جانبوا الـكذب
فإنّه مجانب للإيمان الصادق على شفا منجاة و كرامة والكاذب على شرف مهواة
ومهانة لا تحاسدوا فإنّ الحسد يأكل الإيمان كما تأكل النار
الحطبولاتباغضوافإنّهاالحالقة.وٱعلمواأنّ الأمليسهيالعقلوينسيالذ كرفأكذبوا
الأمل فإنّه غرور وصاحبه مغرور. 1.84ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.84.1عباد
الله إنّ من أحب ّ عباد الله إليه عبدًا أعانه الله على نفسه فٱستشعر الحزن
وتجلبب الخوف فزهر مصباح الهدى في قلبه وأعدّ القِرى ليومه النازل به فقرّب
على نفسهالبعيدوهوّنالشديدنظرفأبصروذ كرفٱستكثروٱرتوىمنعذبفراتسهلتله
مواردهفشربنهل ً اوسلكسبيل ً اجددًاقدخلعسرابيلالشهواتوتخل ّ ىمنالهمومإلّا
راشموىمعلاةفصنمجرخفهبدرفنٱاًدحاواً ّمه كةأهلالهوىوصارمنمفاتيحأبواب الهدى
ومغاليق أبواب الردى. قد أبصر طريقه وسلك سبيله وعرف مناره وقطع غماره
وٱستمسك من العرى بأوثقها ومن الحبال بأمتنها فهو من اليقين على مثل ضوء
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
219 1.83.4 Servants of God! He who counsels himself best, best obeys his
Lord, while he who deceives himself most, most disobeys his Lord. He who
cheats himself is truly cheated, he whose faith is safe is truly joyful,
he who learns from the example of others is truly fortunate, and he who
is misled by desire and conceit is truly wretched. Know this: If you do
good to show off even a little, you assign partners to God, and when you
keep company with the dis- solute, you forget your faith and summon
Satan. Stay away from lies for they weaken faith.The truthful stand on
the threshold of salvation and honor, while liars stand at the rim of
the abyss and the edge of abasement. Don't envy one another, for envy
consumes faith just as fire consumes kindling. Don't hate one another,
for hate destroys.1 Know this: false hope diverts the mind and causes
you to forget God.2 Don't place your faith in it for it is nothing but
deception and its friend is wholly deceived. 1.84 From an oration by
ʿAlī:3 1.84.1 Servants of God! The most beloved of his servants in God's
eyes is the man who, with his help, keeps his passions under control.4
By wearing the shirt of grief and donning the robe of fear, this man
illumines his heart with the lamp of guidance. Putting by stores for the
day that will come, for that guest who will soon be here, he brings the
future close and dismisses the present's tribulations. He looks and
discerns, he learns and gains, and he slakes his thirst
withsweetwater.Histracktothewaterholehasbecomesmooth,sohewalksits
beatenpathanddrinkshisfill.Discardingdesire'smantleanddivestingfromall
aspirations, he holds on to just one. He escapes in this way from
blindness and from the passion-driven rabble, and becomes a key to the
door of guidance, a lock on the door of perdition. He sees his way,
walks his path, recognizes his beacon, and crosses the deep seas. He
grasps the firmest handle and the strongest rope, and so attains the
certainty of one who sees the light of the 1 Lit. "\[Hate\] is the
Shaver (innahā al-ḥāliqah)," an opaque metaphor interpreted variously to
mean that hate (1) erases all good and blessings (ʿA 595); (2) cuts
people off from one another (B 344); (3) harms faith (M 1:428); and (4)
destroys society (R 1:359; Ḥ6:357). 2 The usual rendering of amal
(translated here as "false hope") is simply "hope." In the Arabic
oratorical tradition, though, particularly in ʿAlī's sermons, the word
invariably refers to the false hope that you will live forever, while it
is the word rajāʾ that usually denotes positive hope. The phrase
translated as "causes you to forget God" (yunsī al-dhikr) literally
means, "makes you forget the remembrance," here, of God (B 344), and the
hereafter. 3 Ḥ6:382--383 records two additional passages from this
oration. 4 The word translated as "passions" is nafs (lit. "soul," or
"self"), in the Qurʾanic sense of «the \[base faculty of the\] soul that
incites \[its owner\] to do evil» Qurʾan, Yūsuf 12:53. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 220 Text and
Translation الشمس قد نصب نفسه لله سبحانه في أرفع الأمور من إصدار كلّ وارد
عليه وتصيير كلّ فرع إلى أصله مصباح ظلمات كشّاف غشوات مفتاح مبهمات دفّاع
معضلات دليلفلواتيقولفي ُ فهمويسكتفيسلمقدأخلصللهفٱستخلصهفهومنمعادندينه
وأوتاد أرضه قد ألزم نفسه العدل فكان أوّل عدله نفي الهوى عن نفسه. يصف الحقّ
ويعمل به لا يدع للخير غاية إلّا أمّها ولا مظنّة إلّا قصدها قد أمكن الكتاب من
زمامه فهو قائده وإمامه يحلّ حيث حلّ ثقله وينزل حيث كان منزله. 1.84.2لاّلض
نم ليلاضأو لاّهج نم لئاهج سبتقٱف هب سيلو اً ملاع ىّمست دق رخآو ونصب للناس
أشراكًا من حبال غرور وقول زور قد حمل الكتاب على آرائه وعطف الحقّ على
أهوائه يؤمن من العظائم ويهوّن كبير الجرائم يقول أقف عند الشبهات وفيها وقع
ويقول أعتزل البدع وبينها ٱضطجع فالصورة صورة إنسان والقلب قلب حيوان لا
يعرف باب الهدى فيتبعه ولا باب العمى فيصدّ عنه فذلك ميّت الأحياء. ﴿ف َ أي ْ
نَ ت َ ذْهَب ُ َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ نَأ﴿و﴾نو كُون﴾والأعلام قائمة والآيات واضحة والمنائر
منصوبة فأين يتاه بكم بل كيف تعمهون وبينكم عترة نبيّكم وهم أزمّة الحقّ
وألسنة الصدق فأنزلوهم بأحسن منازل القرآن ورِدُوهم ورود الهيم العطاش. أيّها
الناس خذوها عن خاتم النبيّين صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ⟩إنّه يموت من مات منّا
وليس بميّت ويبلى من بلي منّا وليس ببالٍ⟨. فلا تقولوا بما لا تعرفون فإنّ أكثر
الحقّ فيما تنكرون وٱعذروا رغصألا لقثلا مكيف كرتأو ربكألا لَقَ ّثلاب مكيف
لمعأ ملأ .وه انأو هيلع مكـل ةّجح ال نم al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 221 sun. He deputes for God in the loftiest matters,
providing all comers with water, tracing each branch to its root. He is
a lamp in the darkness, a dispeller of obscurities, a key to
elucidation, a defender against calamities, and a guide in the
wilderness. When he speaks, people can understand, and when silent, he
protects himself from erring. He is sincere in his devotion to God, so
God singles him out for himself. He is thus a repository of God's faith,
a moun- tain that pegs God's earth. He enjoins his soul to justice, and
his first act of justice is to banish all passions from his soul. He
preaches the truth and prac- tices it. He strives continually for good,
with no avenue unexplored, no location untracked. He entrusts his reins
to God's Book, which becomes his driver and leader. He settles where it
unloads its wares and encamps where it sets up camp. 1.84.2 Then there
is another kind: this man calls himself learned when he is not. He
collects scraps of ignorance from the ignorant and bits of error from
the errant, and traps people with deceptive snares and false reports. He
inter- prets the Book to his fancies and bends the truth to his
passions, he promises protection from punishment and trivializes major
sins. He crows, "I pause if I have doubt," when he has fallen into its
pit. He boasts, "I stay away from heresy," when he has made it his
bedfellow. His form is human, but his heart is the heart of a beast. He
does not recognize let alone follow guidance, he cannot identify let
alone repel blindness. He is the living dead. «So where do you go,»1
«and how are you deluded,»2 when banners are raised, waymarks are clear,
and beacons are lit? Indeed, whereto do you stray,
andhowisityouarelost,whenyouhaveamongyoutheProphet'sdescendants, who are
guide ropes of right and tongues of truth? Accord them the high regard
you accord the Qurʾan,3 and race like parched camels to drink at their
water- hole. People! Take this from the Seal of the Prophets, who said,
⟨When one of us dies, he is not dead. When his body disintegrates in the
ground, it has not disintegrated.⟩4 Don't speak of what you don't know,
for what you deny is the truth. Absolve the man against whom you have no
claim, and that is I! Have I not led you in accordance with the Greater
Treasure and given you the Smaller 1 Qurʾan, Takwīr 81:26. 2 Qurʾan,
Anʿām 6:95, Yūnus 10:34, Fāṭir 35:3, Ghāfir 40:62. 3 I.e., revere them
and obey their commands, as you revere and obey the Qurʾan. B 351;
Ḥ6:376; R 1:364. 4 Refers to the Qurʾanic verse, «Do not think that
those who die striving in the path of God are dead: They are alive,
sustained by the side of their Lord.» Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:169; B 351.
The "Seal of the Prophets" is Muḥammad. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 222 Text
and Translation ور
كزتفيكمرايةالإيمانووقفتكمعلىحدودالحلالوالحراموألبستكمالعافيةمنعدلي
وفرشتكم المعروف من قولي وفعلي وأريتكم كرائم الأخلاق من نفسي فلا تستعملوا
الرأي فيما لا يدرك قعره البصر ولا يتغلغل إليه الفكر. 1.84.3منها عفرُ
يالواهوفصمهدروتواهّردمهحنمتةّيمأينبىلعةلوقعمايندلا ّنأ ّناظلا ّنظيىّتح عن
هذه الأمّة سوطها ولا سيفها و كذب الظانّ لذلك بل هي مجّة من لذيذ العيش
يتطعّمونها برهة ثم يلفظونها جملة. 1.85ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أمّا بعد.
فإنّ الله لم يقصم جبّاري دهر قط ّ إلّا بعد تمهيل ورخاء ولم يجـبر عظم أحد من
الأمم إلّا بعد أَزْل وبلاء وفي دون ما ٱستقبلتم من خطب وٱستدبرتم من خطب
معتبر اً بجع ايف .ريصبب رظان يذ ّلك الو عيمسب عمس يذ ّلك الو بيبلب بلق يذ
ّلك امو ومالي لا أعجب من خطأ هذه الفرق على ٱختلاف حججها في دينها لا يقتص
ّ ون أثر نبيّ ولا يقتدون بعمل وصيّ ولا يؤمنون بغيب ولا يعفّون عن عيب يعملون
في الشبهات ويسيرون في الشهوات المعروف فيهم ما عرفوا والمنكر عندهم ما
أنكروا مفزعهم في المعضلات إلى أنفسهم وتعويلهم في المبهمات على آرائهم كأنّ
كلّ ٱمرئ منهم إمام نفسه قد أخذ منها فيما يرى بعرى ثقات وأسباب محكمات.
1.86ومن خطبة له عليه السلام al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
223 One?1 Have I not raised for you the banner of faith, shown you the
bound- aries between licit and illicit, clothed you through my justice
in the garment of security, unfurled for you with my words and deeds the
carpet of good, and exemplified for you with my behavior a virtuous
character? So do not exercise your fancy in areas whose depths your eyes
cannot plumb, or your minds pen- etrate! 1.84.3 From the same oration: A
man may well believe that the world is a camel tied up in the Umayyads'
pen, giving them sweet milk and leading them to pure water, and that
their whip and sword will never be lifted from the community's
neck---but he would be wrong. This is but a delicious drink they will
sip for a short while and then spit out all at once. 1.85 From an
oration by ʿAlī:2 God has not crushed tyrants of any era except after a
long respite and an abun- dant share of fortune, nor has he mended the
bones of any community except after a period of anguish and trial.
Lessons can be gleaned from lesser things than the calamities you have
experienced, yet not every heart discerns, not every ear listens, and
not every eye perceives. I am amazed---and how could I
notbe!---attheerrorscommittedbythesegroupswhoproducesuchdissenting
claims in faith. They neither follow the footsteps of a prophet nor
emulate the actions of a legatee, they do not believe in the mystery or
refrain from debauch- ery, rather, they base their actions on doubts and
tread the path of passions. Good to them is what they find pleasing, and
evil is what they find foul. When faced with obscurities, they rely on
their own judgment, and when faced with ambiguities, they rely on their
own caprice. Each of them is his own leader who---misguidedly, in his
own view---has a firm grip on sturdy handles and strong ropes. 1.86 From
an oration by ʿAlī:3 1 The reference is to the Prophet's hadith: ⟨I
leave among you two weighty, or precious, things (thaqalayn---translated
here as the Greater Treasure and the Smaller One), God's Book and my
descendants, my family. They will never be separated and will come to me
together at the pools of paradise.⟩B 352; R 1:364; Ḥ6:380. 2
Kulaynī(Kāfī,8:64)andMufīd(Irshād,1:291)sayʿAlīdeliveredthisorationinMedina,presum-
ably at the beginning of his caliphate in 35/656. Baḥrānī (B 353) says
the "tyrant" ( jabbār) in the oration refers to Muʿāwiyah, but if the
oration is early in ʿAlī's caliphate as Kulaynī states (Kāfī, 8:64), it
would refer more generally to Muʿāwiyah's Umayyad clan. 3 The first
three lines are the same in §1.156.1. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 224 Text
and Translation أرسله على حين فترة من الرسل وطول هجعة من الأمم وٱعترام١
من الفتن وٱنتشار من الأمور وتلظ ٍّ من الحروب والدنيا كاسفة النور ظاهرة
الغرور على حين ٱصفرار من ورقها وإياس من ثمرها وٱغورار من مائها قد درست
أعلام الهدى وظهرت أعلام الردى فهي متجهّمة لأهلها عابسة في وجه طالبها
ثمرها الفتنة وطعامها الجيفة وشعارها الخوف ودثارها السيف. فٱعتبروا عباد
الله وٱذ ؤابآ يتلا َكيِ ت اورك كم وإخوانكم بها مرتهنون وعليها محاسبون
ولعمري ما تقادمت بكم ولا بهم العهود ولا خلت فيما
بينكموبينهمالأحقابوالقرون٢وماأنتماليوممنيومكنتمفيأصلابهمببعيد.واللهما
٣مهعامسأ نودب مويلا مكعامسأ امو هومكعمسم مويلا اذ انأ اهو اّلإ اً ئيش
لوسرلا مهعمسأ بالأمس ولا شقّت لهم الأبصار وجعلت لهم الأفئدة في ذلك الأوان
إلّا وقد أعطيتم دقلو هومرُحو هب متيِفصُأ الو هولهج اً ئيش مهدعب مترّصب ام
هللاوو نامزلا اذه يف اهلثم نزلت بكم البليّة جائل ً ا خِطامها رِخْوًا بطانها
فلا يغرّنّكم ما أصبح فيه أهل الغرور فإنّما هو ظلّ ممدود إلى أجل معدود.
1.87ومن خطبة له عليه السلام جاربأتاذءامسالذإاً مئاداً
مئاقلزيمليذلاةّيورريغنمقلاخلاةيؤرريغنمفورعملا ولاحجبذاتأرتاجولاليلداج ٍ
ولابحرساج ٍ ولاجبلذوفجاجولافجّذوٱعوجاج
ولاأرضذاتمهادولاخلقذوٱعتمادذلكمبتدعالخلقووارثهوإل ٰ هالخلقورازقه
مهقازرأمسق.ديعب ّلكنابّرقيوديدج ّلكنايلبُ يهتاضرميفنابئادرمقلاوسمشلاو
وأحصىآثارهموأعمالهموعدّدأنفاسهموخائنةأعينهموماتخفيصدورهممنالضمير ومستقرّهم
ومستودعهم من الأرحام والظهور إلى أن تتناهى بهم الغايات. هو الذي ٱشتدّت
نقمته على أعدائه في سعة رحمته وٱت ّ سعت رحمته لأوليائه في شدّة نقمته قاهر
مَن عازّه ومدمّر من شاقّه ومذلّ من ناواه وغالب من عاداه من توكّل عليهكفاه ومن
١م،ن،ش:كذا.ي،ھ: ⟩ٱعتزام⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩الدهور⟨. ٣ن،ش:كذا.م، ي،ھ:
⟩أسمعكمالرسول ...بدونأسماعكم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
225 God sent Muḥammad when an age had gone by without prophets, when
peo- ple had long been in slumber, when steeds of revolt were bucking,
affairs were in disarray, and battles were aflame. The world was devoid
of light, her deceit was shining bright, her leaves had yellowed and
browned, her fruits could not
befound,andherwaterhadsunkunderground.Thewaymarksof guidancehad
crumbled, the waymarks of hell were erected. The world glared at her
tenants and scowled in the face of her seekers. Mutiny was her harvest,
cadavers her preferred food, fear was her garment, and the sword her
daily robe. Servants of God, take heed! Remember the deeds to which your
fathers and brothers remain pledged, and for which they must account. I
swear on my life and say this: No great time has passed between their
years and yours, no eons separate their seasons and yours, you are not
so far today from the day you were in their loins. By God! Everything
God's Messenger told them, I reiterate to you today, for your hearing is
no less keen today than theirs was yesterday. Just as they were given
eyes to see, just as they were given hearts to comprehend, so too have
you, in your generation, been given. And neither, by God, are you shown
something they were ignorant of, or privileged with knowledge they were
not. The calamity that has attacked you has a slackened nose-rein and a
loosened belly-strap,1 so do not be deceived by the ascendance of these
men of deceit. Their spreading shade is fleeting. 1.87 From an oration
by ʿAlī: God is recognized without being seen, a creator who did not
need to deliberate. He was existent and present from eternity, when
there were no mansion-filled skies,2 no inaccessible veils,3 no dark
nights, no tranquil seas, no craggy gorges, no twisting ravines, no
outspread earth, and no legged creatures. God is the originator of all
creation and its inheritor, the maker of all creation and its sus-
tainer. The sun and the moon strive for his pleasure as they wear out
the old and bring near the far. He apportions our sustenance and reckons
our traces and deeds. He enumerates our breaths and our glances, the
secrets our bosoms hide, and our places of rest and passage in wombs and
loins until our final end. His punishment crushes his enemies, despite
the vastness of his mercy, while his mercy enfolds his devotees, despite
the harshness of his punishment. He subjugates his challengers, destroys
those who defy him, humbles his oppo- nents, and overthrows his foes. He
suffices those who trust him, he gives to those who beseech him, he
repays with favors those who extend him a loan of 1 I.e., its rider
could fall off at any moment. Ḥ6:390; B 357; R 1:372. 2 Reference to the
signs of the zodiac, Qurʾan, Burūj 85:1. 3 Refers to "inaccessible veils
of divine light," Ḥ6:394; R 1:372--373. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 226 Text
and Translation
سألهأعطاهومنأقرضهقضاهومنشكرهجزاه.عباداللهزِنواأنفسكممنقبلأنتوزنوا
وحاسبوها من قبل أن تحاسبوا وتنفّسوا قبل ضيق الخناق وٱنقادوا قبل عنف
السياق اهريغ نم هل نكي مل رجازو ظعاو اهنم هل نوكي ىّتح هسفن ىلع نَعُ ي مل
نم هّنأ اوملعٱو زاجر ولا واعظ. 1.88ومن خطبة له عليه السلام تعرف بخطبة
الأشباح وهي من جلائل الخطب. روى مَسعدة بن صدقة عن الصادق جعفر بن محمّد
عليهما السلام أنّه قال خطب أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام والصلاة بهذه الخطبة
على منبر الـكوفة وذلك أنّ رجل ً ا أتاه فقال له يا أمير المؤمنين
عمتجٱف⟨ةعماج ةالصلا⟩ ىدانو مالسلا هيلع بضغف ةفرعم هبو اً ّبح هل دادزنل
انّبر انل فص الناس حتّى غض ّ المسجد بأهله فصعد المنبر وهو مغضب متغيّر
اللون. فحمد الله سبحانه وصل ّ ى على النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ثمّقال١
1.88.1الحمد لله الذي لا ي َ فِر ُ ه المنع ولا ي ُ كديه الإعطاء والجود إذ
كلّ معطٍ منتقص سواه وكلّ مانع مذموم ما خلاه وهو المنّان بفوائد النعم وعوائد
المزيد والقِس َ م. عياله الخلائق ضمن أرزاقهم وقدّر أقواتهم ونهج سبيل
الراغبين إليه والطالبين ما لديه وليس بما سئل بأجود منه بما لم يسأل.
الأوّل الذي لم يكن له قبل فيكون شيء قبله والآخر الذي ليس له بعد فيكون شيء
بعده والرادع أناسيّ الأبصار عن أن تناله أو تدر كه ما
ٱختلفعليهدهرفتختلفمنهالحالولاكانفيمكانفيجوزعليهالانتقال.ولووهب ما تنفّست
عنه معادن الجبال وضحكت عنه أصداف البحار من فِل ِ زّ نايقِعلاو نيَ ج ُ ّللا ٢
١م، ي، ھ: كذا. ن، ش: ⟩وكان سائل سأله أن يصف الله له حتّى كأنّه يراه عيانًا
فغضب لذلك⟨. ٢ن،ش،ي،ھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.م: ⟩فِل َ ق⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 227 their deeds, and rewards those who thank him. Servants
of God! Weigh your- selves before you are weighed, judge yourselves
before you are judged, breathe before your throats constrict, go meekly
before you are shoved. Finally, know this: if a man is not guided to
combat his own passions, if he cannot counsel and admonish himself, no
other counselor, no other admonisher, will avail. 1.88 From an oration
by ʿAlī known as Ashbāḥ, "Ethereal Forms," one of the most marvelous of
orations. Masʿadah ibn Ṣadaqah narrated the following from Jaʿfar ibn
Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq, who said: The Commander of the Faithful delivered
this ora- tion on the pulpit of Kufa, when a man approached him and
asked, Commander of the Faithful, describe for us what our Lord looks
like exactly so that our love and knowledge may increase. ʿAlī, outraged
at the blasphemy, called loudly, ⟨Gather for the ritual prayer!⟩and when
the people crammed into the mosque, ʿAlī ascended the pul- pit, pale
with anger. He praised God, pronounced benedictions on the Prophet, then
said:1 1.88.1 Praise God, whom withholding does not make richer nor
munificence and generosity impoverish, for giving depletes every giver's
store except God's, and every withholder is blameworthy except him. He
is the Munificent Giver who bestows increasing favors and manifold
gifts, and all creatures are his children---he guarantees the sustenance
they receive, ordains the food they eat, and paves the way for people to
petition him and seek his bounty. In fact, he is as generous in granting
what they do not ask for as he is in granting what they do. He is the
first, with no before, so nothing could exist before him, he is the
last, with no after, so nothing will exist after him. He prevents the
pupils of our eyes from capturing or grasping his image. Time never
changes for him, so his condition will never change, nor is he in a
place, so his location will never change. If he distributed all that
mountain depths yield and smiling seashells emit, from nuggets of silver
and native gold to forests of coral and fistfuls of 1 This introduction
is from manuscripts M andY, and is also found in Ṣadūq,Tawḥīd, 48. Manu-
script N and Rāwandī's commentary (R 1:374) have the following version:
"The oration was delivered in response to a man who asked ʿAlī to
describe God for him in a way such that he could almost see him with his
eyes. Angered, ʿAlī said \[the text of the oration\]." The com-
mentaries of Baḥrānī (B 361) and Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ6:398) amalgamate
both versions. I have added the words "at the blasphemy" for clarity;
ʿAlī's anger, as it becomes clear from this alternative preface and from
the oration text, is at the anthropomorphic views implicit in the man's
question. ⟨Gather for the ritual prayer!⟩is a dictum pronounced in early
Islam to gather people for a momentous announcement. On its origin and
early usage, see Qutbuddin, Arabic Oration, 202. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 228 Text
and Translation هدنع ناكلو هدنع ام ةعس دفنأ الو هدوج يف كلذ رّثأ ام
ناجرملا ديصحو ّردلا ةراثُ نو
منذخائرالإنعاممالاتنفدهمطالبالأناملأنّهالجوادالذيلايغيضهسؤالالسائلين ولا
يبخّله إلحاح الملحّين. 1.88.2فٱنظر أيّها السائل فما دلّك القرآن عليه من صفته
فٱئتمّبه وٱستضئ بنور هدايته
وماكلّفكالشيطانعلمهممّاليسفيالكتابعليكفرضهولافيسنّةالنبيّصل ّ ىاللهعليه وآله
وأئمّة الهدى أثره فكِلْ علمه إلى الله سبحانه فإنّ ذلك منتهى حقّ الله عليك.
وٱعلم ُرارقإلابويغلانودةبورضملادد ُ
ّسلاماحتقٱنعمهانغأنيذلامهملعلايفنيـخسارلا ّنأ بجملة ما جهلوا تفسيرَه من
الغيب المحجوب. فمدح الله ٱعترافهم بالعجز عن تناول ما لم رصتقٱف .اًخوسر
ههنك نع ثحبلا مهفّلكي مل اميف قّمعتلا مهكرت ىّمسو اً ملع هب اوطيحي على ذلك
ولا تقدّر عظمة الله سبحانه على قدر عقلك فتكون من الهالـكين. هو القادر
الذي إذا ٱرتمت الأوهام لتدرك منقطع قدرته وحاول الفكر المبرّأ من خطر
الوساوس أن يقع عليه في عميقات غيوب ملـكوته وتولّهت القلوب إليه لتجري في
كيفيّة صفاته وغمضتمداخلالعقولفيحيثلاتبلغهالصفاتلتنالعلمذاتهردعهاوهيتجوب
روجبلانُ يالهّنأبةفرتعمتهبُجذإتعجرفهناحبسهيلإةصّلختمبويغلافَدُسيواهم الاعتساف
كنهُمعرفته ولا تخطر ببال أولي الرويّات خاطرة من تقدير جلال عزّته. الذي
ٱبتدع الخلق على غير مثال ٱمتثله ولا مقدار ٱحتذى عليه من خالق معبود كان
قبله. وأرانا من ملـكوت قدرته وعجائب ما نطقت به آثار حكمته وٱعتراف الحاجة
من الخلق إلى أن يقيمها بم َ يف ترهظو هتفرعم ىلع هل ةّجحلا مايق رارطضٱب انّ
لد ام هتّوق ١كاس البدائع التي أحدثها آثار صنعته وأعلام حكمته فصار كلّ ما
خلق حجّة له ودليل ً ا عليه .ةمئاق عدبملا ىلع هتلالدو ةقطان ريبدتلاب هتّجحف
اً تماص اًقلخ ناك نإو ١ن، ش، ي، ھ، ونسخة في م: كذا. وأصل م،ونسخة في ش، ھ:
⟩بمسلك⟨. ونسخةأخرىفي ش،ھ: ⟩بم ُ سَكِ ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 229 pearl, this would not affect his generosity or deplete
his vast possessions. The appealsof
allthepeopleintheworlddonotexhausthistreasure.HeistheGen- erous Giver.
Supplications do not empty his wellsprings and persistence does not make
him withhold. 1.88.2 See it this way, O seeker: Accept what the Qurʾan
tells you about God and seek light from its radiant guidance. As for the
questions that Satan bur- dens you with, questions not mandated for you
by the Book or reported in the Prophet's Sunnah and the Imams' guidance,
consign their knowledge to God. That is God's ultimate right over you.
Know this: Men rooted in knowl-
edgedonotattempttoforcethemselvesthroughfortifiedbarricadesbutaccept the
veiled mysteries whose details they lack as they are presented to them.
They admit their inability to grasp things beyond their compass, which
God praises them for, and he calls their abstention---the abstention
from delving into things whose essence he has not burdened them with
investigating--- deep knowledge.1 You, too, limit yourself to this
boundary, and do not measure God's greatness by the measure of your
intellect---if you venture there, you will perish. He is the
All-Powerful Being. If the imagination sends scouts to sur- vey the
extent of his power, if minds free of Satan's whisperings attempt to
penetrate the deep mysteries of his kingdom, if bewildered, yearning
hearts walk in the way of his attributes, and if sharp intellects whose
descriptions fail to capture him attempt to open the door to his
essence, he repels them, one and all. They wander the deep and dark
ravines of his mysteries to find a way to him, but, knocked hard on
their foreheads, they are made to turn back, admitting that no
aggression will plumb his core,2 and no reflection will glimpse the
magnitude of his might. He created the world with no model, no plan
measured by a creator worshipped prior to him. He showed us his pow-
erful kingdom, the wonders articulated in the traces of his wisdom, and
the world's frank admission that it needs his strong grip to remain
standing--- thereby he provided the proof that compels us to acknowledge
him. Traces of his artisanship and signs of his wisdom can be seen in
the marvels he made. Everything he created offers proof of his existence
and guides us to him, even silent objects, for their design speaks of
that proof, and it guides us toward their creator. 1 Ar. rusūkh, echoes
Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:7, «Men rooted in knowledge» (al-rāsikhūna fī
al-ʿilm). 2 "Aggression" ( jawr al-iʿtisāf ), is also interpreted as
"turning away from the main road" (Ḥ 6:409; R 1:383), or "extreme
wanderings in those stations" (B 369). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 230 Text
and Translation 1.88.3فأشهد أنّ من شبّهك بتباين أعضاء خلقك وتلاحم حِقاق
مفاصلهم المحتجبة لتدبير حكمتك لم يعقد غيب ضميره على معرفتك ولم يباشر
قلبه اليقين بأنّه لا ن ِ دّ لك َ ل اَ ّ نُك ن ِإ ِهّٰللٱَت﴿ نولوقي ذإ نيعوبتملا
نم نيعباتلا يّربت عمسي مل هّنأكف فِي ضَل َ نيِب ُ ّم ٍلا ُ ن ْذ ِإ بَرِ ب
ْمُكيِّوَس ةيلح كولحنو مهمانصأب كوهّبش ذإ كب نولداعلا بذك .﴾َنيِ مَ لاَعْلٱ ِّ
المخلوقين بأوهامهم وجزّؤوك تجزئة المجسّمات بخواطرهم وقدّروك على الخلقة
المختلفة القوى بقرائح عقولهم. فأشهد أنّ من ساواك بشيء من خلقك فقد عدل بك
والعادل كافربماتنزّلتبهمحكماتآياتكونطقتعنهشواهدحججبيّناتكفإنّكأنتاللهالذيلم
تتناه في العقول فتكون في مهب ّ فكرها مكيّفًا ولا في رويّات خواطرها فتكون
محدودًا .اً فّرصم 1.88.4منها قدّر ما خلق فأحكم تقديره ودبّره فألطف تدبيره
ووجّهه لوجهته فلم يتعدّ حدود منزلته ولم يقصر دون الانتهاء إلى غايته ولم
يستصعب إذ أمر بالمضيّ على إرادته وكيف وإنّما صدرت الأمور عن مشيئته. المنشئ
أصناف الأشياء بلا رويّة فكر آلَ إليها ولا قريحة غريزة أضمر عليها ولا تجربة
أفادها من حوادث الدهور ولا شريك أعانه على ٱبتداع
عجائبالأمور.فتمّخلقهوأذعنلطاعتهوأجابإلىدعوتهلميعترضدونهريثالمبطئ ولا أناة
المتلـكّئ فأقام من الأشياء أوَدها ونهج حدودها ولاءم بقدرته بين متضادّها
ووصلأسبابقرائنهاوفرّقهاأجناسًامختلفاتفيالحدودوالأقدار١والغرائزوالهيئات.
بدايا خلائق أحكم صنعها وفطرها على ما أراد وٱبتدعها. 1.88.5ومنها في صفة
السماء َ رُ فتاوهرقيلعتالبمظنو جهاولاحَمَصدوعٱنفراجهاووش ّ
جبينهاوبينأزواجهاوذلّل للهابطين بأمره والصاعدين بأعمال خلقه حُزونة معراجها
وناداها بعد إذ هي دخان٢ ١ن، ش، م، ھ: كذا. ي، ونسخة في ش: ⟩والأقطار⟨. ٢ن،
ش، ي، ھ: كذا. م: أضيفت ⟩مبين⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
231 1.88.3 I bear witness that anyone who likens you to the disparate
limbs of your creatures, or to their bonded joints that your clever
design has concealed, has erred.Hisinnerself
hasnotrecognizedyou,andhisheartisnotcertainthatyou have no peer. He does
not appear to have heard of followers disowning those they followed,
saying, «By God, we were clearly misguided when we equated you with the
Lord of the worlds!»1 They lie who compare you! They lie when they liken
you to their idols, when their imagination adorns you with the orna-
ments of your creatures, their notions divide you into physical parts,
and their intellects measure you against the multiplicity of your
creatures' faculties. I bear witness that to equate you with any of your
creatures is to compare you, and to compare you is to profess unbelief
in the clear verses you have revealed, in the witness provided by your
eloquent signs. For you are God. Intellects with their penetrating
thoughts cannot analyze your totality, nor hearts with their reflections
limit or position you. 1.88.4 From this oration: He planned the things
he created with precision, arranged them with elegance, and led them in
a certain direction, where they do not transgress the limits of their
station, fall short of their goal, or pull back when commanded to pro-
ceed. How could they, pray, when all affairs transpire according to his
will? He generated categories of things without relying on cogitation,
engaging an inner disposition, drawing on experience obtained from the
rise and fall of eons, or using a partner's help to originate his
wondrous affairs. His creation was thus completed, and it bowed to him
in obedience, and answered his call, unhin- dered by sluggish delay or
laggardly indolence. He straightened out what was crooked, laid out its
boundaries, harmonized its contrasting parts, bound the cords of linked
entities, and distributed all into various species with distinct
parameters, values, dispositions, and forms. Such was the beginning of
God's creatures, each crafted with exquisite precision, produced and
originated by his will. 1.88.5 From the same oration, describing the
sky: When God created the sky, he hung its spaces together without
ropes, sol- dered the gaps in its parts, and connected them closely,
each with the other.2 He smoothed its knobby ladder for beings who
descend with his command, and ascend with his creatures' deeds.3 He
called out to it while it was entirely 1 Qurʾan, Shuʿarāʾ 26:97--98. 2
Ar. azwāj, interpreted as its "analogs" (R 1:377; Ḥ1:419), "other
celestial objects" (ʿA 600), or "the angels" (B 373). 3 Those who
descend and ascend are the angels. B 373--374; R 1:388. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 232 Text and
Translation فٱلتحمت عرى أشراجها وفتق بعد الارتتاق صوامت أبوابها وأقام
رصدًا من الشهب
الثواقبعلىنقابهاوأمسكهامنأنتمورفيخرقالهواءبأَيْدِهوأمرهاأنتقفمستسلمة لأمره
وجعل شمسها آية مبصرة لنهارها وقمرها آية ممحوّة من ليلها وأجراهما في مناقل
مجراهماوقدّرمسيرهمافيمدارجدرجهماليميزبينالليلوالنهاربهماوليعلم﴿ع َ
دَدَالسِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَاب َ ﴾بمقاديرهما ثمّعلّق في جوّها فلـكها وناط بها زينتها من
خفيّات دراريها ومصابيح كواكبها ورمى مسترقي السمع بثواقب شهبها وأجراها على
أذلال تسخيرها من ثبات ثابتها ومسير سائرها وهبوطها وصعودها ونحوسها
وسعودها. 1.88.6ومنها في صفة الملائكة ثمّخلق سبحانه لإسكان سماواته وعمارة
الصفيح الأعلى من ملـكوته خلقًا بديعًا من ملائكته ملأ بهم فروج فجاجها وحشا
بهم فتوق أجوائها. وبين فجوات تلك الفروج زجل المسبّحين منهم في حظائر القدس
وسترات الحجب وسرادقات المجد ووراء ذلك الرجيج الذي تستكّ منه الأسماع سبحات
نور تردع الأبصار عن بلوغها فتقف خاسئة على حدودها. أنشأهم على صور مختلفات
وأقدار متفاوتات ﴿أُولِي أَجْنِحَةٍ﴾١ تسبّح جلال عزّته لا ينتحلون ما ظهر في الخلق
من صنعه ولا يدّعون أنّهم يخلقون َ ب﴿ هب درفنٱ اّمم هعم اً ئيش َ رْك ُ ّم ٌداَ
بِع ْل مُون لَا ي َ سْبِقُون َ هُبِالْقَوْلِ وَهُم بِأَمْرِهِ ي َ .﴾َنوُ لَمْع جعلهم فيما هنالك
أهل الأمانة على وحيه وحمّلهم إلى المرسلين ودائع أمره ونهيه وعصمهم من ريب
الشبهات فما منهم زائغ عن سبيل مرضاته وأمدّهم بفوائد المعونة وأشعر قلوبهم
تواضع إخبات السكينة وفتح لهم أبوابًا ذلل ً ا إلى تماجيده ونصب لهم منارًا
واضحة على أعلام توحيده لم تثقلهم موصرات الآثام ولم ترتحلهم عُقَب الليالي
والأيّام ولم ترم الشكوك بنوازعها عزيمة إيمانهم ولم تعترك الظنون على معاقد
يقينهم ىنْث َ ّم﴿ تفيضأ:م.اذك:ھ،ي،ش،ن١ ٰ َ لُ ثَو اث َ ﴾. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
233 smoke,1 and its crevices became sealed. He cracked its locked doors
open and set blazing sentinels in the gaps, restraining them with his
own hands from falling through breaks in the firmament and commanding
them to remain where they were. He made the sun a sign that brightens
the day and the moon a sign that wanes through the nights.2 He set the
two in motion within their orbits and ordained their passage within
their tracks. By their movements, he distinguished night from day, and
by their measure, he showed the «reckoning and calculation of years.»3
Then he suspended the sky's sphere in the ether, hung ornaments of
starry clusters and bright lamps,4 used blazing meteors to
strikedownspyingdemons,5andlaunchedthestarsaccordingtotheirstations:
fixed versus moving, falling versus rising, and ominous versus lucky.
1.88.6 From the same oration, describing the angels: Then God created
wondrous angels to populate his skies and inhabit his king- dom's
highest planes. With them he filled the gaps in its rifts and the
fissures in its ether, and in those gaps, in that sacred enclosure, in
veils of conceal- ment and canopies of glory, their thunderous chanting
of his praise rings out. Behind the roar that deafens the ear shines the
majesty of light that dazzles the eye, and the eye is driven back at
this boundary. He fashioned them in differ- ent forms, in diverse ranks,
each «with sets of wings».6 They chant litanies of praise for his
glorious power, never claiming that they helped shape his crea- tures,
nor professing to have created, alongside him, a single, solitary thing.
In this, he has no peer. «Rather, they are his honored servants, they
speak when he has spoken, and act on his command.»7 He entrusts them
with his revelation and sends them to his messengers bearing his
commands and prohibitions. He shields them from doubt and uncertainty,
so not one strays from the path of his pleasure. He equips them with aid
and assistance, and infuses their hearts with deference, with humility,
peace, and calm. He eases their path to glorify- ing him and erects
beacons to illumine for them the signs of his unity. They are never
weighed down by sins, or loaded, like camels, by the calamities brought
by nights and days. Suspicion's arrows don't penetrate the robust frame
of their belief, presumptions' rasps don't fray the strong cords of
their convictions, the 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Dukhān 44:10. 2 Reference
to Qurʾan, Isrāʾ 17:12. 3 Qurʾan, Yūnus 10:5. 4 Reference to Qurʾan,
Ṣāffāt 37:6. 5
ReferencetoQurʾan,Ḥijr15:18.Ihavespecifiedtheword"demons"basedonthepreviousverse
(Qurʾan, Ḥijr 15:17): «We protected it from every cursed demon.» 6
Qurʾan, Fāṭir 35:1. 7 Qurʾan, Anbiyāʾ 21:26--27. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 234 Text
and Translation ولاقدحتقادحةالإحَنفيمابينهمولاسلبتهمالحـيرةمالاق َ
منمعرفتهبضمائرهم وسكن من عظمته وهيبة جلاله في أثناء صدورهم ولم تطمع فيهم
الوساوس فتقترع١ بريبها على فكرهم. 1.88.7منهم من هو في خلق الغمام الدلّح
وفي عظم الجبال الشمّخ وفي قترة الظلام الأَيْهم ومنهم من خرقت أقدامهم تُخوم
الأرض السفلى فهي كرايات بيض قد نفذت في مخارق الهواء وتحتها ريح هفّافة
تحبسها على حيث ٱنتهت من الحدود المتناهية. قد
ٱستفرغتهمأشغالعبادتهووسّلتحقائقالإيمانبينهموبينمعرفتهوقطعهمالإيقان به إلى
الوله إليه ولم تجاوز رغباتهم ما عنده إلى ما عند غيره. قد ذاقوا حلاوة
معرفته وشربوا بالكأس الرويّة من محبّته وتمكّنت من سويداء قلوبهم وشيجة خيفته
فحن َ وا بطول الطاعة ٱعتدال ظهورهم ولم ينفد طول الرغبة إليه مادّة تضرّعهم
ولا أطلق عنهم عظيم الزلفة ربق خشوعهم ولم يتولّهم الإعجاب فيستكثروا ما سلف
منهم ولا ىلع مهيف تارتفلا رجت ملو مهتانسح ميظعت يف اً بيصن لالجإلا
ةناكتسٱ مهل تكرت طول دؤوبهم ولم ت َ غِض٢ رغباتهم فيخالفوا عن رجاء ربّهم
ولم تجف ّ لطول المناجاة
أسَلاتألسنتهمولاملـكتهمالأشغالفتنقطعبهمسالخـبرإليهأصواتهمولمتختلففي مقاوم
الطاعة مناكبهم ولم يثنوا إلى راحة التقصير في أمره رقابهم ولا تعدو على
عزيمة جدّهم بلادة الغفلات ولا تنتضل في هممهم خدائع٣ الشهوات. قد ٱتّخذوا ذا
العرش ذخيرة ليوم فاقتهم ويمّموه عند ٱنقطاع الخلق إلى المخلوقين برغبتهم لا
يقطعون أمد غاية عبادته ولا يرجع بهم الاستهتار بلزوم طاعته إلّا إلى موادّ
من قلوبهم غير منقطعة من عامطألا مهرسأت ملو مهّدج يف اوُ نَ يف مهنم ةقفشلا
بابسأ عطقنت مل هتفاخمو هئاجر فيؤثروا وشيك السعي على ٱجتهادهم ولم
يستعظموا ما مضى من أعمالهم ولو ٱستعظموا
١ن،م،ش،ھ:كذا.ي،ونسخةفيم،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩فتفترع⟨. ٢م،ن،ش،ھ:كذا.ي: ⟩تعص⟨،
ويبدو أن التنقيط سقط من الحرفين الأخيرين. نسختان في م: ⟩تنقص⟨و⟩تفض⟨.
٣ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩بدائع⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 235 fever of malice doesn't burn their bonds, perplexity
doesn't pillage recogni- tion of God from their hearts or plunder
veneration of God and awe for his grandeur from their breasts, and the
devils with their whisperings don't dare to sow doubts or cast lots for
controlling their thoughts. 1.88.7 Among them are angels created as
heavy clouds, or with the massive dimensions of lofty mountains, or as
dark as the starless night, angels whose feet pierce the nethermost
regions of the earth and look like white banners protruding in the air.
A gentle breeze below confines them inside the farthest limits they can
reach. God's worship is their sole occupation, faith's realities provide
them with the means to recognize him, and certainty in his existence
severs them from all else save yearning for him. Their desires seek what
he bestows, never crossing to seek another's favors. They taste the
sweetness of his recognition and drink from the full cup of his love.
His fear is rooted deep in their hearts, so they bend their backs in
protracted worship. Lengthy peti- tions do not exhaust the store of
their entreaties, and closeness to him does not loosen the cord of their
submissiveness. No vanity aggrandizes for them their prior acts, while
the humility generated in them by glorifying God leaves them no room to
glorify their own deeds. No intervals of languor interrupt their
protracted efforts, and no diminishing expectations make them question
the hopes they have placed in their Lord. Long prayers do not parch
their tongues, nor preoccupations weaken their raised voices. Their
shoulders do not sag as
theyworship,standinginranks,nordotheyrelaxtheirnecksandsofallshortin
carrying out his command. No dullness or disregard vanquishes their
resolve, no deceiving passions vie to shoot down their high aspirations.
They choose the Lord of the Throne to be the treasure they put by for
their day of need, and they go to him with petitions when others go to
his creatures. Their journey to perfect his worship never ends, and
their passion for embracing his obedi- ence stems from their hearts'
inner substance, which is ever infused by hope in him and fear. No
severance of the cord of dread makes them lessen their labors, no
ensnaring greed makes them favor flighty acts over serious effort. They
do not aggrandize their past deeds, else complacent hope would have
expelled their palpitating trepidations. No Satanic dominion puts them
at vari- ance among themselves concerning their Lord: no evil sundering
of ties divides them, no rancor caused by mutual envy takes hold, no
calamitous doubts sepa- rate them, and no contrary aspirations---like a
horse with one blue eye and one al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 236 Text and
Translation ذلك لنسخ الرجاء منهم شفقات وجلهم ولم يختلفوا في ربّهم
بٱستحواذ الشيطان عليهم ولم يفرّقهم سوء التقاطع ولا تولّاهم غلّ التحاسد ولا
تشعّبتهم مصارف الريب ولا ٱقتسمتهم أخياف١ الهمم فهم أسراء إيمان لم يفكّهم
من ربقته زيغ ولا عدول ولا ون ً ى
ولافتوروليسفيأطباقالسماواتموضعإهابإلّاوعليهملكساجدأوساعٍ حافد .اًمظع مهبولق
يف مهّبر ةّزع دادزتو اً ملع مهّبرب ةعاطلا لوط ىلع نودادزي 1.88.8ومنها في صفة
الأرض ودَحْوها على الماء كَب َ س َ الأرض على مَور أمواج مستفحلة ولجج بحار
زاخرة تلتطم أَواذي ّ أمواجها وتصطفق متقاذفات أثباجها وترغو زبدًا كالفحول
عند هياجها. فخضع جماح الماء المتلاطم لثقل حملها وسكن هيج ٱرتمائه إذ
وطئته بكلكلها وذلّ مستخذيًا إذ تمعّكت اًداقنم ّلذلا ةمَكَح يفو اًروهقم اً يجاس
هجاومأ باخطصٱ دعب حبصأف .اهلهاوكب هيلع أسيرًا وسكنت الأرض مدحوّة في لج ّ
خومشو هئالتعٱو هِو ْأَب ةوخن نم تّدرو هراّيت ة َ يَز دعبو هتاقزن دعب دمهف
هتيرِج ةّظِك ىلع هتَمَعَكو هئاوَ لُ غ ّومسو هفنأ فان وثباته. فلمّا سكن هَيج الماء
من تحت أكنافها وحمل شواهق الجبال الب ُ عيباني رّ جف اهفاتكأ ىلع خّذ
العيونمنعرانينأنوفهاوفرّقهافيس ُ تايسارلاباهتاكرحلّدعواهديداخأواهديِ ببوه
من جلاميدها وذوات الشناخيب الشمّ من صياخيدها فسكنت من الميدان برسوب
الجبال في قِطَع أديمها وتغلغلها متسرّبة في جَوبات خياشيمها وركوبها أعناق
سهول الأرضينوجراثيمهاوفسحبينالجوّوبينهاوأعدّ
الهواءمتنسّمًالساكنهاوأخرجإليهاأهلها على تمام مرافقها. ثمّلم يدع جُرُز الأرض
التي تقصر مياه العيون عن رَوابيها ولا تجد
جداولالأنهار٢ذريعةإلىبلوغهاحتّىأنشألهاناشئةسحابتحييمواتهاوتستخرجنباتها أل
ّ َ زَ ق نيابتو هعَمُ ل قارتفٱ دعب اهمامغ ف عه حتّى إذا تمخّضت لج ّ ة المزن
فيه وٱلتمع برقه في فَسأ دق اًكرادتم اً ّحس هلسرأ هباحس مكارتمو هبابَر رَوْهَنَك
يف هضيموْمَنَ ي ملو هفَفِك ّ هَيدَبه ١ن،م،ي،ومصحّحةفيه،ونسخةفيش:كذا.أصلش:
⟩ٱختلاف⟨.أصلھ: ⟩أخلاف⟨. ٢م،ي،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش: ⟩الأرض⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
237 black---fragment them.1 Captives of faith, no deviation, deflection,
exhaustion, or lassitude frees them from its lasso. In all the skies'
layers, there exists no place, not even the width of a strip of rawhide,
that does not contain a prostrat- ing angel or a swift messenger. Their
long worship continually increases their knowledge of their Lord, and
the grandeur of their Lord's might ever increases in their hearts.
1.88.8 From the same oration, describing the earth and how he laid it
out over water: God poured earth into the mighty, heaving waves and the
deep, swollen seas, where waves towered and clashed, and waters raced
and crashed, as they grunted and frothed like a camel stallion in
arousal. Weighed down by the earth's mass their recalcitrant gallop
became tractable, crushed by the earth's torso their tumultuous tossing
subsided, and dragged along by the earth's with- ers they submitted with
docility. After their earlier clamor, the waves grew still and were
conquered. Tamed with the curb of servility, they were herded in defeat
and captivity. The earth ensconced itself then, spreading in the depths
of the flowing current, repelling its pride, haughtiness, disdain, and
excess of energy, and muzzling its overabundant flow. After much
vaulting and supercil- ious assault, the waters abated. When the water's
tumult had grown still under the earth's wings, under the weight of the
soaring, lofty mountains placed on its shoulders, God made springs of
pure water gush from the towering massifs and channeled them into
outstretched wastelands and undulating furrows. He anchored the earth's
movements with massive rocks and high-topped, stony crags. Sunk deep
beneath its surface, rupturing the smooth hollows of its crust, and
straddling the backs of its plains and compacted soils, the mountains
caused the earth's heaving to still. He opened wide the space between
the earth and the ether, and made the air fit for the earth's residents
to breathe. Then, with all preparations complete, he extracted from it
and introduced to it its liv- ing inhabitants. In all of this, he did
not neglect those barren tracts too high for springs and beyond the
reach of rivers. He created swollen clouds to bring life to those bare
stretches and coax out their vegetation. Piecing together wispy swirls
and scattered puffs, he shaped a thick, enveloping cloud. Then---when
its deep waters roiled, when lightning flickered from its hands, when
flashes in the massed white-and-black cloudbanks and the heaped
rainclouds awoke from their slumber---he let it loose in one continuous
downpour. The cloud 1 Ar. akhyāf, said of people who are "different, one
from another, in their states or conditions, or in their forms, shapes
or semblances;" from khayafa, which means, "having one of the eyes blue,
the other black; said of a horse, or any animal." Brothers who are
akhyāf are "sons of one mother but different fathers." Lane, Lexicon,
s.v. "Kh-Y-F." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 238 Text and
Translation َ فُدو هبيضاهأ رَرِد بونَ جلا هيرْمَ ت َ بو اهيناوَ ب َكْرَ ب باحسلا
تقلأ اّملف .هبيبآش ع عاع ما ٱستقلّت به من العِب ْ ء المحمول عليها أخرج به
من هوامد الأرض النبات ومن زُعْر الجبال الأعشاب فهي تبهج بزينة رياضها
وتزدهي بما ألبسته من رَيط أزاهيرها وحِلية جاجفلا قرخو ماعنألل اً قزرو
مانألل اًغالب كلذ لعجو اهراونأ رضان نم هب ١تطّمُس ام في آفاقها وأقام المنار
للسالـكين على جوادّ طرقها. 1.88.9لّوأ هلعجو هقلخ نمًةرَ يِخ مالسلا هيلع مدآ
راتخٱ هرمأ ذفنأو هضرأ دّهم اّملف
جبلّتهوأسكنهجنّتهوأرغدفيهاأكلهوأوعزإليهفيمانهاهعنهوأعلمهأنّ فيالإقدامعليه
التعرّضلمعصيتهوالمخاطرةبمنزلتهفأقدمعلىمانهاهعنهموافاةلسابقعلمهفأهبطهبعد
التوبةليعمرأرضهبنسلهوليقيمالحجّةبهعلىعباده.ولميخلهمبعدأنقبضهممّايؤ كّدعليهم
هئايبنأ نم ةرَ يِ ـخلا نسلأ ىلع ججحلاب مهدهاعت لب هتفرعم نيبو مهنيب لصيو
هتّيبوبر ةّجح ومتحمّلي ودائع رسالاته قرنًا فقرنًا حتّى تمّت بنبيّنا محمّد صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله حجّته وبلغ المقطع عذره ونذره. وقدّر الأرزاق فكثّرها وقلّلها
وقسّمها على الضيق والسعة فعدل فيها ليبتلي من أراد بميسورها ومعسورها
وليختبر بذلك الشكر والصبر من غنيّها وفقيرها ثمّقرن بسعتها عَقابيل فاقتها
وبسلامتها طوارق آفاتها وبفُر َ ج أفراحها غُصَص أتراحها. اً جلاخ هلعجو
اهبابسأ توملاب لصوو اهرّخأو اهمّدقو اهرّصقو اهلاطأف لاجآلا قلخو لأشطانها
وقاطعًا لمرائر أقرانها. 1.88.10عالم السرّمن ضمائر المضمرين ونجوى
المتخافتين وخواطر رَجْم الظنون وعُقَد عزيمات اليقين ومسارق إيماض الجفون وما
ضمنته أكنان القلوب وغيابات ١م،ھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.ن: ⟩شمطت⟨.ش،ي:معًا.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
239 hung low and hugged the earth, and the South Wind milked its teats
to yield torrents and spills. When the cloud had settled its limbs on
the ground, when it had dropped all the water it had drawn and carried,
he brought forth plants from the barren ground and herbage from the bare
mountains. The earth now rejoiced in the beauty of its meadows, it
flaunted its garments of delicate blos- soms and its necklaces of fresh
flowers. All this he created to sustain humans and nourish cattle. He
then hewed passes in remote regions and erected bea- cons for those who
would walk the open roads. 1.88.9 When God had primed the earth and
executed his will, he singled out
Adamfromamonghiscreaturesandmadehimthefirsthuman.1Helodgedhim in
paradise and offered him all manner of delectable foods but warned him
to keep away from the forbidden tree.2 He cautioned him that if he came
near it, he would be committing a sin and jeopardizing his rank.
Adam---as God had known he would---approached the tree God had forbidden
to him. After he repented, however, God sent him down to populate the
earth with his descen- dants and serve as God's proof for his
servants.Then, when God took him back, he did not void them of the clear
proof of his majesty or the means to his recog- nition. He sent them his
proof on the tongues of his chosen prophets, who carried his entrusted
messages to them, generation after generation, until he completed his
message to his creatures through our own Prophet Muḥammad, and his
advocacy and warnings reached their climax. God decreed sustenance,
giving some people much and others little, distributing constricted
shares to some and ample ones to others. In all this, he was just. He
tested those he wished with prosperity and those he wished with poverty
to assess the grati- tude of the rich and the patience of the poor. He
also paired abundance with sores of destitution, wellbeing with
calamities that creep up in the night, and joys that gladden with
sorrows that choke. He ordained lifespans to be long or short, swift or
tardy, and he handed their reins to death. Death pulls in their long
ropes and cuts through the tight plait of their fastenings. 1.88.10 God
knows all secrets. He knows the thoughts of those who conceal what they
are thinking, the clandestine conversations of those who whisper, stray
notions generated by wild conjectures, secured resolutions arising from
certainty, stolen glances flashed by drooping eyelids, veiled matters of
the 1 Lit. "natural disposition" (Ar. jibillah). B 390 explains it as
"human." 2 Lit. "that which God had forbidden to him." I have replaced
the phrase, here and in the next line, with the word "tree," echoing the
Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:35: «God said to Adam ... do not approach this tree.»
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 240 Text and
Translation عجرو ّماوهلا يتاشَمو ّر َ ّذلا فئاصمو عامسألا خئاصم هقارتسٱل
تغصأ امو بويغلا الحنين من المولّهات وهمس الأقدام ومنفسح الثمرة من ولائج
غلف الأكمام ومنقمع الوحوش من غِيران الجبال وأوديتها ومختبأ الب َ عوض بين
سُوق الأشجار وأَلحيتها ومَغرِز الأوراقمنالأفنانومحط ّ
الأمشاجمنمساربالأصلابوناشئةالغيومومتلاحمها ودرور قطر السحاب في متراكمها
وما ت َ سفي الأعاصير بذيولها وتعفو الأمطار بسيولها وعَوم١ نبات٢ الأرض في
كثبان الرمال ومستقرّ ذوات الأجنحة بذُرى شناخيب الجبال وتغريد ذوات المنطق
في دياجير الأوكار وما أوعته٣ الأصداف وحضنت عليه أمواج البحار وما غشيته
سُدفة ليل أو ذرّ عليه شارق نهار وما ٱعتقبت عليه أطباق الدياجير وسُب ُ حات
النور وأثر كلّ خطوة وحس ّ كلّ حر كة ورجع كلّ كلمة وتحريك كلّ شَفةومستقرّكلّ
نسمةومثقالكلّ ذرّةوهَماهمكلّ نفسهامّةوماعليهامنثمر
شجرةأوساقطورقةأوقرارةنطفةأون ُ قاعةدمومضغةأوناشئةخَلْقوسلالة.لمتلحقه في
ذلك كلفة ولا ٱعترضته في حفظ ما ٱبتدع من خلقه عارضة ولا ٱعتورته في تنفيذ
الأموروتدابيرالمخلوقينملالةولافترةبلنفذهمعلمهوأحصاهمعدده٤ووسعهمعدله
وغمرهم فضله مع تقصيرهم عن كنه ما هو أهله. 1.88.11َجْرُ تنإولومأمريـخفل َ
ّمؤتنإريثكـلادادعَ ّتلاوليمجلافصولالهأتنأ ّمهّٰللا فخـيرمرجوّ.اللّٰهمّ
وقدبسطتليفيمالاأمدحبهغيركولاأثنيبهعلىأحدسواكولا أوجّهه إلى معادن الخيبة
ومواضع الريبة وعدلت َ بلساني عن مدائح الآدميّين والثناء على المربوبين
المخلوقين. اللّٰهمّ ولكلّ مُثنٍ على من أثنى عليه مثوبة من جزاء أو عارفة من
عطاء وقد رجوتك دليل ً ا على ذخائر الرحمة وكنوز المغفرة. اللّٰهمّ وهذا مقام
من أفردك ١م،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩عموم⟨. ٢م،ن،ي،ش،ونسخة في
ھ: كذا. ي، وأصل ھ، ونسخة في ش: ⟩بنات⟨. ٣ش، ن، وشرح الراوندي ّ ، ومصحّحة
فيھ:كذا.م: ⟩وعته⟨.أصلھ،ونسخةفيي: ⟩أودعته⟨. ٤م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ن، ش:
⟩كتابه⟨.أصلھ،ونسخةفيش ⟩عدّه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
241 heart, deep-welled mysteries, the sounds to which ears stealthily
hearken, the summer nests of tiny ants, the winter habitats of mites,
the repeated wails of mourning women, the sound of faint footsteps, the
place hidden within the innermost sepal where fruit begins to grow, the
concealed spaces in moun- tain hollows and riverbeds where wild beasts
hole up, the cracks between the boles and bark of trees in which gnats
hide away, the node on a branch from which a leaf sprouts, the basin
where semen is deposited after flowing through the waterways of men's
loins, the forming of the new clouds and their thick amassing, the
abundant flow of raindrops from towering cloudbanks, what the whirlwinds
stir up with their kicking gusts,what the rains erase with their flood
water, how tumbleweeds are swept by the wind over dunes of sand, the
resting places of birds atop the high mountain peaks, the warbling of
birds in the dim- ness of their nests, what seashells store and waves on
the deep water envelop,
whatablacknightconcealsandbrightdaybreakreveals,whatisprevailedonin
alternation by layers of darkness and splendors of radiance, the trace
of every footstep, the sensation of every movement, the echo of every
word, the motion of everylip,therestingplaceof
everycreaturethatbreathes,theweightof every tiny particle, the sobbing
of every grieving heart, and whatever is on the earth,1 including the
fruit growing on a tree, a falling leaf, the resting place of a drop of
semen, the place where blood gathers in pools and where an embryonic
clump of flesh congeals, and the emergence of creatures and offspring.
In all this, God suffers no toil, no obstacle obstructs him from
guarding his creation, and no stupor or apathy impedes him from
executing his affairs or governing his crea- tures. Far from it! His
knowledge penetrates them, his reckoning comprehends, his justice
encompasses, and his favors engulf. All this, despite how short they
fall in offering his due. 1.88.11 God, to you belong the loveliest
epithets and the largest armies. When solicited, you are the best
repository of hope, and when petitioned, you are the best receptacle of
trust. God, you stretch out your hand to me with such favors that I can
praise none but you, extol none but you, I do not direct my praise
toward those who are founts of disappointment or sites of suspicion, for
you have diverted my tongue from praising the children of Adam, from
extolling your creatures and subjects. God, every extoller deserves a
reward that com- pensates, a gift freely bestowed by the one he extolls:
I beseech you to guide me to the treasures of your mercy and the riches
of your forgiveness. God, here I stand before you. I have singled you
out with the proclamation of unity that 1 Lit. "on it," explained in the
commentaries as "on earth." Ḥ7:30; B 392; R 1:418. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 242 Text
and Translation ال كيلإ ةقاف يبو كريغ حدامملاو دماحملا هذهل ا ً ّقحتسم
ري ملو كل وه يذلا ديحوتلاب يجـبر مسكنتها إلّا فضلك ولا ينعش من خلّتها إلّا
منّك وجودك فهب لنا في هذا المقام رضاك وأغننا عن مدّ الأيدي إلى من سواك إنّك
على ما تشاء قدير.١ 1.89نامثع لتق دعب ةعيبلا ىلع سانلا هدارأ اّ مل مالسلا
هيلع هل مالك نمو دعوني وٱلتمسوا غيري فإنّامستقبلون أمرًاله وجوه وألوانلا
تقوم لهالقلوب ولا تثبت عليه العقول وإنّ الآفاق قد أغامت والمحجّة قد تنكّرت.
وٱعلموا أن ّ ي إن أجبتكم ركبت بكم ما أعلم ولم أُصِـغ إلى قول القائل وعَتْب
العاتب وإن تركتموني فأنا كأحد كم ولعل ّ ي رمأ هومتيّ لو نمل مكعوطأو
مكعمسأ كم وأنا لـكم وزيرًا خير لـكم منّي أميرًا. 1.90ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام 1.90.1أمّا بعد. أيّها الناس فأنا فقأت ُ عين الفتنة ولم يكن ليجترئ
عليها أحد غيري بعد .اهبَ لَك ّدتشٱو اهبَ هيَغ َجام نأ 1.90.2فٱسألوني قبل أن
تفقدوني فوالذي نفسي بيده لا تسألوني عن شيء فيما بينكم وبين الساعة ولا عن
فئة تهدي مائة وتضلّ مائة إلّا نبّأتكم بناعقها وقائدها وسائقها ومُناخ ركابها
ومحط ّ رحالها ومن ي ُ قتل من أهلها قتل ً ا ومن يموت منهم موتًا. َ لَ ع َكَ
ّن ِإ﴿ :ن،ش.اذك:ي،م١ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِير﴾.ھ: ⟩إنّكعلىماتشاءوكلّ شيءقدير⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
243 is your due, and I see no one worthy of these tributes and praises
but you. My need of you is urgent. Nothing but your kindness can heal my
destitution's bro- ken bones, nothing but your beneficence and
generosity can raise me from my lowly state of privation. So grant us
your acceptance now as we stand before you, and free us from spreading
our hands before any but you. You are power- ful over all that you
will.1 1.89 From an address by ʿAlī, when, after ʿUthmān's killing, the
people rushed to him to pledge allegiance:2 Leave me and seek another!
We are looking at a thing with many faces and shades, in which hearts
will not remain steady or minds stable, for the skies are overcast and
the road is obscure. Know this: If I accept your pledge, I shall drive
you on the path I know to be right, without caring about your chid- ing
or rebuke. If you leave me be, however, I will be as one of you---in
fact, I will be the most attentive and obedient among you toward the man
you entrust with your rule. You will find me a better counselor than
comman- der. 1.90 From an oration by ʿAlī:3 1.90.1 People! I have gouged
out the eyes of revolt. None other would have dared to challenge it when
its darkness had spread so far, when its madness had become so rabid.
1.90.2 Ask me before I am lost to you! By the one who holds my life in
his hand, I swear this: If you ask me about what will happen between now
and the last
hour,aboutanygroupwhowillguideahundredarightorleadahundredastray, I
shall inform you of who will call out and direct that herd, who will
lead in the front and who will drive from the rear, where their camels
will kneel and where they will set down their gear, who will be killed
in battle and who will die a nat- ural death. 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Āl
ʿImrān 3:26, Taḥrīm 66:8. 2 In Medina, 35/656. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:434. 3
The commentators agree that §1.90.1 refers to ʿAlī's battles, but they
differ on which ones: (1) Ḥ7:57--58 (citing early, unnamed historical
sources, and transcribing further sections of the oration) says the
oration was delivered soon after Nahrawān, i.e., either in Nahrawān or
Kufa in 38/658, presumably meaning it refers to this battle; Yaʿqūbī
(Tārīkh, 2:193) places it in Kufa, just after Nahrawān. (2) R 1:424--425
says it refers to the Battle of the Camel and the Battle of Ṣiffīn. (3)
B 395 says it refers to the Camel, Ṣiffīn, and Nahrawān. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 244 Text and
Translation 1.90.3ولو قد فقدتموني ونزلت كرائه الأمور وحوازب الخطوب لأطرق
كثير من السائلين وفشل كثير من المسؤولين وذلك إذا قلّصت حربكم وشمّرت١ عن
ساق وضاقت الدنيا عليكم ضيقًا تستطيلون أيّام البلاء عليكم حتّى يفتح الله
لبقيّة الأبرار منكم َنْمُحَي تاربدم نفرعيو تالبقم نرَكنُ ي تهّبن تربدأ اذإو
تهّبش تلبقأ اذإ نتفلا ّنإ حَوم الرياح يصبن بلدًا ويخطئن بلدًا. 1.90.4ألا إنّ
أخوف الفتن عندي عليكم فتنة بني أميّة فإنّها فتنة عمياء مظلمة عمّت خطّتها وخص
ّ ت بليّتها وأصاب البلاء من أبصر فيها وأخطأ البلاء من عمي عنها وٱيم الله
لتجدُنّ بني أميّة لـكم أرباب سوء بعدي كالناب الضروس ت َ عذِم بفيها وتخبط
بيدها ِ بْزَ تو
نبرِجلهاوتمنعدَرّهالايزالونبكمحتّىلايتركوامنكمإلّانافعًالهمأوغيرضائرولا
يزالبلاؤهمحتّىلايكونٱنتصارأحد كممنهمإلّامثلٱنتصارالعبدمنربّهوالصاحب من
مستصحبه ترد عليكم فتنتهم شوهاء مخشيّة وقِطَعًا جاهليّة ليس فيها منار هدى ولا
.ةاعدب اهيف انسلو ةاجنب اهنم تيبلا َلهأ نحن ىرُ ي مَلَ ع 1.90.5ثمّيفرّجها
الله عنكم كتفريج الأديم بمن يسومهم خسفًا ويسوقهم عنفًا ويسقيهم بكأس مصبّرة
لا يعطيهم إلّا السيف ولا يحلسهم٢ إلّا الخوف فعند ذلك تودّ قريش بالدنيا وما
فيها لو يرونني مقامًا واحدًا ولو قدر جَزر جَزور لأقبل منهم ما أطلب اليوم
بعضه فلا يعطوننيه. ١م، ھ، ومصحّحة في ش: كذا. ن، وأصل ش: ⟩إذا قلّصت حربكم
عن ساق⟨بسقوط ⟩وشمّرت⟨.ي: ⟩إذاقامتحربكمعلىساق⟨،ونسختانفيالهامش
⟩وشمّرتعنساق⟨و⟩إذا قلّصت⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩يجلسهم⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
245 1.90.3 After you lose me, when calamities strike you and devastation
deci- mates,manywhowanttoaskwillcastdowntheireyesandmanywhoareasked
willfail toanswer.Whenwartucksupitsgarmentsandgirdsitsloincloth,when the
world presses down on you and you have nowhere to turn, you will find
the days of trial long, until, at last, God grants victory to the heirs
of the righteous.
Whenmutiniesadvance,theyconfuse,andastheyturnaway,theywarn.Unrec-
ognized in approach, they are identified only when they leave. They
twist and turn like gusts of wind, striking one town and passing by
another. 1.90.4 Hark! Of all seditions, the one I fear most for you is
the Umayyads'. A blind and dark insurrection, its tyranny will range
wide, yet its blows will target individuals, striking those who know it
for what it is, but passing over those who choose to be blind. God's
oath! You will find the Umayyads harsh overlords after I am gone, like a
timeworn, quick-to-bite camel cow, that, jaws snapping, forelegs
stamping, and hind feet kicking, refuses to be milked. They will oppress
you all, until only those who bring them benefit remain stand- ing, or
those don't do them harm. Their tyranny will be so fierce that if you
dare to seek retribution, you will be as ineffective as a slave seeking
retribution against his master, or a minion against his ruler.1 Ugly,
frightening, a battalion from the Age of Ignorance,2 their insurrection
will leave you with no beacon that guides, no signpost to follow. In all
this, we, the people of the Prophet's house, will remain quietly on the
side. We will never take part in their mis- sion. 1.90.5 Then God will
strip their tyranny from you, as a hide is stripped from a carcass, at
the hands of a man who will inflict them with humiliation, drive them
with brute force, pour them bitter aloes, strike them with the sword,
and shroud them in fear.3 When that happens, the Quraysh will ache to
see me--- they would trade the world and all that it contains to have me
beside them for one last stand, even if only for the swift instant it
takes to butcher a camel, to accept from them in full what I ask for a
scrap of today, and which they refuse to give. 1 I have added the word
"ineffective" after Ḥ7:55; B 397. 2 Ar. jāhiliyyah, referring to the
pre-Islamic period and its pagan people's "ignorance" of the one God.
The term jahl---from which the term jāhiliyyah derives---also means
"foolish judg- ment." Lane, Lexicon, s.v. "J-H-L." 3 The commentators'
interpretation that this is a prediction about the end of the Umayyad
regime at the hands of the rising Abbasid power (Ḥ7:57--60; B 397) seems
unlikely, because the Abbasids, like the Umayyads, were also from the
Quraysh tribe. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 246 Text and
Translation 1.91ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.91.1فتباركاللهالذيلايبلغهبعدالهممولاينالهحَدس١الفطنالأوّلالذيلاغاية له
فينتهي ولا آخر له فينقضي. 1.91.2منها فٱستودعهم في أفضل مستودع وأقرّهم في
خير مستقرّتناسختهم كرائم الأصلاب إلى مطهّرات الأرحام كلّما مضى سلف قام منهم
بدين الله خلف حتّى أفضت كرامة الله سبحانه إلى محمّد صل ّ تامورألا ّزعأو ٢اً
تِبْنَم نداعملا لضفأ نم هجرخأف هلآو هيلع هللا ى
مغرسًامنالشجرةالتيصدعمنهاأنبياءهوٱنتجبمنهاأمناءهعترتهخيرالعتروأسرتهخير
لانُ ي ال رمثو لاوط عورف اهل مرك يف تقسبو مرح يف تتبن رجشلا ريخ هترجشو
رسألا فهو إمام من ٱتّقى وبصيرة من ٱهتدى سراج لمع ضوءه وشهاب سطع نوره وزَنْد
برق لمعهسيرتهالقصدوسنّتهالرشدوكلامهالفصلوحكمهالعدلأرسلهعلىحينفترةمن الرسل
وهفوة عن العمل وغَباوة من الأمم. 1.91.3اعملوا رحمكم الله على أعلام بيّنة
فالطريق نهجٌ يدعو إلى دار السلام وأنتم في دارِ مستعت َ ب على مَه َ ل وفراغ
والصحف منشورة والأقلام جارية والأبدان صحيحة والألسن مطلقة والتوبة مسموعة
والأعمال مقبولة. 1.92ومن خطبة له عليه السلام مهتّ لزتسٱو ءاوهألا مهتوهتسٱ
دق ةنتف يف ٣نوطباحو ةريح يف لاّلض سانلاو هثعب الـكبرياء وٱستخفّتهم
الجاهليّة الجهلاء حيارى في زلزال من الأمر وبلاء من الجهل فبالغصل ّ
ىاللهعليهوآلهفيالنصيحةومضىعلىالطريقةودعاإلى﴿ٱلْحِكْم َ ةِوَٱلْمَوْعِظَةِ﴾.
١م،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش،ن:كذا.أصلش،ن: ⟩حسن⟨. ٢ش،ن،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا. .⟨اً بصنم⟩
:ملصأ ٣م،ش،ن،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ي،وأصلھ: ⟩خابطون⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 247 1.91 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.91.1 Blessed is God!
Vaunting aspirations cannot attain him, swift intellects cannot find
him, he has no limit and will not expire, he has no boundary and will
not cease to be. 1.91.2 From the same oration: God placed them in the
finest depository and the choicest repository. Patri- cian loins
conveyed them to chaste wombs. Each time a forebear passed, his
successor stood up to establish God's religion, until this divine honor
came to Muḥammad. God extracted him from the most precious of mines to
be quar- ried, the most venerated of roots from which to grow, from the
very same tree from which God brought forth his prophets and chose his
trustees. Muḥam- mad's line is the best line, his family is the best
family, his tree is the best tree. Rooted in the sacred enclave, it
rises high in its fertile soil, with tall branches and matchless fruits.
Muḥammad is the leader of the pious and a source of sight for those who
follow the path, a shining lamp, a blazing star, and a spark- ing flint.
His way is the middle way, his practice gives direction, his words are
final, and his judgment is the embodiment of justice. God sent Muḥammad
after a period had passed without prophets, when people had stopped
doing good, and nations' minds had dulled. 1.91.3
Dogood---MayGodhavemercyonyou!---andfollowitsclearwaymarks, for its road
is wide and leads to the Abode of Safety. Beware, for you live in the
abode of those who have been warned, where you have been given a brief
respite and a little time. Registers are still open, pens still run with
ink, bodies are still healthy, tongues are still unfettered, repentance
is still received, and deeds are still accepted. 1.92 From an oration by
ʿAlī: At the time when God sent Muḥammad as a prophet, people wandered
in confusion and attempted to gather their firewood in the darkness of
sedition.
Passionshadseducedthem,arrogancehadcausedthemtoslip,grossignorance had
rendered them witless, and they stood confounded in the face of tumul-
tuous affairs and painful folly. Muḥammad did his utmost to offer them
sincere advice. He trod the true path and called to «wisdom and
counsel.»2 1 Excerpt from a famous long oration that ʿAlī delivered in
Kufa after the arbitration in 37/658, urging his followers to regroup
and fight Muʿāwiyah (Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd, 41, 72). Iskāfī (Miʿyār, 255) says
it is part of the Luminous Oration (Zahrāʾ), which also includes §1.106
and §1.158. 2 Qurʾan, Naḥl 16:125. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 248 Text and
Translation 1.93ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
الحمدللهالأوّلفلاشيءقبلهوالآخرفلاشيءبعدهوالظاهرفلاشيءفوقهوالباطنفلا شيء
دونه. منها في ذ كر رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله مستقرّه خير مستقرّ
ومنبته أشرف منبت١ في معادن الـكرامة ومَماهد السلامة قد رئاونلا هب أفطأو
نئاغضلا هب نفَد .راصبألا ةّمزأ هيلإ تينُ ثو راربألا ةدئفأ هوحن تفرُص أل ّ ف
به إخوانًا وفرّق به أقرانًا أعزّ به الذل ّ ة وأذلّ به العزّةكلامه بيان وصمت ُ
ه لسانٌ. 1.94ومن كلام له عليه السلام
1.94.1ولئنأمهلاللهالظالم٢فلنيفوتأخذهوهولهبالمرصادعلىمجازطريقهوبموضع
الشجا من مساغ ريقه. أما والذي نفسي بيده ليظهرنّ هؤلاء القوم عليكم ليس
لأنّهم أولى بالحقّ منكم ولـكن لإسراعهم إلى باطل صاحبهم٣ وإبطائكم عن حقّي.
ولقد أصبحت الأمم تخاف ظلم رعاتها وأصبحت أخاف ظلم رعيّتي ٱستنفرتكم للجهاد
فلم .اولبقت ملف مكـل تحصنو اوبيجتست ملف اً رهجو ا ً ّرس مكتوعدو اوعمست
ملف مكتعمسأو اورفنت شهود٤ كغيّاب وعبيد كأرباب أتلو عليكم الحِكم فتنفرون
منها وأعظكم بالموعظة البالغة فتتفرّقون عنها وأحثّكم على جهاد أهل البغي فما
آتي على آخر قولي حتّى أراكم ⟩متفرّقين ١ش، ن، ي، ھ، ونسخة في م: كذا. أصل م:
⟩ومنصبه ... منصب⟨. ٢ش، ن، م، ھ: كذا. ي: ⟩الباطل⟨.
٣م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش: ⟩لإسراعهمإلىباطلهم⟨.
٤م،ن:كذا.ش،ي،ھ:بإضافةهمزةقبلها ⟩أشهود⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 249 1.93 From an oration by ʿAlī: Praise God! He is the
first---there was nothing before him. He is the last---there is nothing
after him. He is the manifest---there is nothing above him. He is the
hidden---there is nothing below him. From the same oration describing
God's Messenger: Muḥammad came from the worthiest repository and the
noblest roots, from themineof honorandthecradleof
soundness.Virtuousheartsinclinedtohim, and discerning eyes were drawn.
Rancorous intentions were buried because of
him,andburningflamesweredoused.Brotherswerereconciledandpeerswere
separated, servility was converted to might and might was rendered
servile. His words were the epitome of elucidation, his very silence was
eloquent. 1.94 From an address by ʿAlī:1 1.94.1 God may have granted the
tyrant a reprieve, but he will surely appre- hend him. He lies in wait
on the road along which the tyrant must pass, in the place where his
saliva, dripping into his throat, will choke him. By the one who holds
my life in his hand, I swear that this faction will overpower you---not
because they have a greater right, but because they hasten to support
their leader's unrighteous claim,2 while you hold back from supporting
my right! Other communities fear tyranny from their rulers, while I have
come to fear tyranny from my subjects! I urge you to fight, but you
don't respond, I speak to you, but you don't listen, I call on you in
private and in public, but you don't answer, I counsel you, but you
don't accept my counsel. Those present among you are like those absent,
and servants behave like masters. I recite litanies of wisdom to you but
you bolt from them, I counsel you with profound advice but you scatter
in its wake, I urge you to fight these treacherous people, but before I
reach the end of my speech you ⟨disperse like the hands of Sabā⟩3---you
1 In Nukhaylah, just outside Kufa, after the arbitration in 37/658. A
few lines are repeated in §3.254, that specifies the location. Mufīd
(Irshād, 277) cites it as part of an oration which begins "O people of
Kufa, start preparations for fighting your enemy Muʿāwiyah and his sup-
porters." ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ (Maṣādir, 2:192) argues that this text is part
of §1.34, delivered after Nahrawān when the Kufans held back from
marching on Muʿāwiyah. 2 The reference is to the Syrians, the Umayyads,
and Muʿāwiyah. Ḥ7:72; B 403; R 1:431. 3 The reference is to the proverb,
⟨They dispersed like the hands of Sabā (Sheba)⟩(tafarraqū aydiya Sabā),
i.e., they dispersed never to be reunited again. Sabā was a pre-Islamic
man from Yemen. His hands are a metaphor for his sons who, warned by a
sybil of the Maʾrib dam's imminent rupture and flooding, dispersed
widely across the Arabian Peninsula. Maydānī, Majmaʿ al-amthāl, 2:6--8;
Ḥ7:74--75; B 403; R 1:432. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 250 Text and
Translation أياديَ
سَبا⟨ترجعونإلىمجالسكموتتخادعونعنمواعظكمأقوّمكمغدوةوترجعونإليّ .مَ ّوقملا
لضعأو مِّوقملا زجع .ةّينحلا رهظكةّيشع 1.94.2أيّها الشاهدة أبدانهم الغائبة
عنهم عقولهم المختلفة أهواؤهم المبتلى بهم أمراؤهم صاحبكم يطيع الله وأنتم
تعصونه وصاحب أهل الشام يعصي الله وهم يطيعونه لوددت والله أنّ معاوية
صارفني بكم صرف الدينار بالدرهم فأخذ منّي عشرة منكم وأعطاني رجل ً ا منهم.
1.94.3يا أهل الـكوفة مُنيت منكم بثلاث وٱثنتين صمّ ذو أسماع وبكم ذو كلام
وعمي هابشأ اي .مكيديأ تَبِرَ ت ءالبلا دنع ةقث ناوخإ الو ءاقللا دنع قدص
رارحأ ال راصبأ وذ الإبل غاب عنها رعاتها كلّما جمعت من جانب تفرّقت من آخر١
والله لكأن ّ ي بكم فيما إخالُ لو حمس الوغى وحمي الضراب قد ٱنفرجتم عن ٱبن
أبي طالب ٱنفراج المرأة عن ّ نإاهلُ بُ ق يلعلىبيّنةمنرب ّ يومنهاجمننبيّيوإن ّ
اورظنا.اًطْقَ لهُطُقْلَأحضاولاقيرطلاىلعلي أهل بيت نبيّكم فٱلزموا سمتهم وٱتّبعوا
أثرهم فلن يخرجو كم من هدى ولن يعيدو كم في َ بَ ل نإف ىدر دُوا ف َ ٱلْب ُ
دُوا وإن نهضوا فٱنهضوا ولا تسبقوهم فتضلّوا ولا تـتأخّروا عنهم فتهلـكوا.
1.94.4لقد رأيت أصحاب محمّد صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فما أرى أحدًا منكم يشبههم
لقد كانوا ىلع نوفقيو مهدودخو مههابج نيب نوحواري اًمايقو اًدّجس اوتاب دق اًرْبُ
غ اً ثْعُش نوحبصي ذ نم رْمَ جلا لثم كر معادهم كأنّ بين أعينهم رُ كَب ذ اذإ
مهدوجس لوط نم ىزعِ ملا ُ كر اللههملتأعينهمحتّىتَب ُ نماً
فوخفصاعلاحيرلامويرجشلاديميامكاوُدامومهبويج ّل العقاب ورجاء للثواب.
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩جانب⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 251 return to your assemblies and incite one another not to
heed the counsel you have heard. I straighten you out in the morning,
but you come to me in the evening, crooked as a bow. The one who would
straighten has given up, for the one who needs straightening cannot be
cured! 1.94.2 You people! Your bodies are present, but your minds are
gone, your ambitions are divided so your commanders suffer,1 your ruler
obeys God, yet you disobey him, and the Syrians' ruler disobeys God, yet
they obey him. By God, how I wish Muʿāwiyah would trade me dirham for
dinar, taking ten of you and giving me one of them! 1.94.3 Kufans! I
have been tested by three things in you, and two more: you have ears but
are deaf, you have speech but are dumb, you have eyes but are blind, you
are not courageous in battle as free men ought to be, nor trustwor- thy
brothers in times of trial. May your hands be filled with dirt! You
people, you resemble camels whose herdsmen have disappeared---gathered
together on one side, you scatter from the other. I see you, by God,
when war clamors and fighting heats up, running away from Abū Ṭālib's
son and leaving the way to him open like a woman with her legs spread
wide, her front part exposed.2 I stake my claim on a clear proof from my
Lord,3 and follow a path laid out by my Prophet. I walk with purpose on
the clear road.4 Look to your Prophet's family, stay on their course,
and follow their trace, for they will never steer you from the path of
guidance or return you to the path of destruction. Sit if they sit and
stand if they stand, don't get ahead of them or you will stray, don't
hold back from them or you will perish. 1.94.4 I have seen Muḥammad's
Companions and none of you resembles them! The morning would find them
disheveled and covered in dust, having spent the night in prostration
and prayer, pressing foreheads and cheeks to the
ground,yearningforthereturnasthoughwalkingonlivecoals,theskinof their
brows gnarly from long prostrations like the knees of a goat. Their eyes
would stream at the mention of God's name until their bosoms were
soaked. They would shudder from fear of punishment and hope of reward
like trees in a gale. 1 These first lines echo the opening lines of
§1.29. 2 "Abū Ṭālib's son" is ʿAlī. "A woman with her legs spread wide,
her front part exposed" (infirāj al-marʾati ʿan qubulihā) is an idiom
that refers to a woman giving birth. Ḥ7:76; B 404. 3 Reference to
Qurʾan, Anʿām 6:57. 4
Ar.alquṭuhulaqṭan,explainedasIhavetranslateditbyRāwandīandIbnAbīal-Ḥadīd(R1:432.
Ḥ7:76). Baḥrānī (B 404) says it means "I pick my way through it," adding
that it means "I pick out right from wrong." Lane (Lexicon,
s.v. "L-Q-Ṭ") supports both meanings. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 252 Text
and Translation 1.95ومن كلام له عليه السلام والله لا يزالون حتّى لا ي َ
دَعُوا لله مَحْر َ مًا إلّا ٱستحلّوه ولا عَقْدًا إلّا حلّوه وحتّى لا يبقى بيت مدر ولا
وبر إلّا دخله ظلمهم ونَبا به سوء رَعْيِهم وحتّى يقوم الباكيان يبكيان باكٍ يبكي
لدينه وباكٍ يبكي لدنياه وحتّى تكون نصرة أحد كم من أحدهم كنصرة العبد من اً
ّنظ هللاب مكنسحأ ءانغ اهيفمكمظعأ نوكي ىّتحوهباتغٱ باغ اذإو هعاطأ دهش اذإ
هدّيس َ بِقاَعْلٱ َ ّن ِإ﴿ـف اوربصٱف متيلتبٱ نإو اولبقٱف ةيفاعب هللا مكاتأ
نإف .﴾نيِقَ ّتُ مْلِ لَة 1.96ومن خطبة له عليه السلام نحمده على ما كان ونستعينه
من أمرنا على ما يكون ونسأله المعافاة في الأديان كما نسأله المعافاة في
الأبدان. أوصيكم بالرفض لهذه الدنيا التار كة لـكم وإن لم تحبّوا تركها
والمبلية لأجسامكم وإن كنتم تحبّون تجديدها. فإنّما مثلـكم ومثلها كسَفْرٍ
سلـكوا سبيل ً ا فكأنّهم و هوغلب دق مهّنأكف اً ملَ ع اوّمأو هوعطق دق كم عسى
المُجري إلى الغاية أن يجري إليها حتّى يبلغها وما عسى أن يكون بقاءُمن له يوم
لا ي َ عدوه وطالب ٌ حثيث ٌ يحدوه في الدنيا حتّى يفارقها. فلا تنافسوا في
عزّ الدنيا وفخرها ولا ت َ عجبوا بزينتها ونعيمها ولا تجزعوا من ضرّائها
وبؤسها فإنّ عزّها وفخرها إلى ٱنقطاع وزينتها ونعيمها إلى زوال وضرّاءها
وبؤسها إلى نفاد وكلّ مدّة فيها إلى ٱنتهاء وكلّ حيّ فيها إلى فناء. أوليس لـكم
في آثار الأوّلين وفي آبائكم الماضين تبصرة ومعتبر إن كنتم تعقلون. أَوَلم
تروا إلى الماضين منكم لا al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
253 1.95 From an address by ʿAlī:1 By God, they will continue thus until
they commit every forbidden act and untie every knot, until not one
brick house and not one goat-hair tent remains unpenetrated by their
tyranny or uprooted by their corrupt herding, until two weepers stand up
to weep, one weeping over his religion, another weeping over his
possessions, and until, if one of you seeks vengeance on one of them, he
will be a slave seeking vengeance upon his master,2 obeying if present
and slander- ing if absent. The richest of you will be the person who
places his trust entirely in God. Remember this: If God grants you his
protection accept it, and if he tests you be patient, for «the best
outcome is reserved for the pious.»3 1.96 From an oration by ʿAlī:4 We
praise him for favors past and seek his help for what is to come. We ask
him to grant us vigor in our faith, just as we ask him to grant us vigor
in our bod- ies. I counsel you to reject the world, for she will reject
you despite your dislike of leaving her and cause your bodies to decay
despite your wish for renewal. You and she are like a band of travelers
who seem already to have crossed the path they traverse, who seem
already to have reached the mountain they are headed for. How likely it
is that if you race your steed toward a goal, you will soon attain it!
How likely it is that your life today will not continue into tomor- row!
For you are driven on by a pursuer who will not relent until he makes
you leave the world. Don't compete for the world's might and glories,
don't be cap- tivated by her beauty and delights or shaken by her
injuries and sorrows, for her might and glories will be cut off, her
beauty and delights will cease, and her injuries and sorrows will end.
Each period of her time will end, and every being living in her will
perish. Doesn't the evidence of earlier peoples and the exam- ple of
your own ancestors alarm and enlighten you? If you would only reflect! 1
Excerpt from an oration---preceded, according to Ibn Qutaybah (Imāmah,
1:174), by §1.124, and including §1.140---delivered at Ṣiffīn (in
37/657), when some of ʿAlī's associates told him about how Muʿāwiyah
lavishly rewarded his supporters and urged him to do the same (Ḥar-
rānī, Tuḥaf, 185). This section concerns the Umayyads' tyranny and
corruption (B 405; Ḥ 7:78--79). 2 Similar language in §1.90.4, also
about the Umayyads, interpreted as ineffectiveness against them. Ḥ7:55;
B 397. 3 Qurʾan, Hūd 11:49. 4 Friday sermon delivered early in ʿAlī's
caliphate, presumably in Medina in 35/656. R 1:438. Iskāfī (Miʿyār, 271)
cites some lines in a passage that he says "ʿAlī used to call out every
night in araisedvoice."Thelastparagraphisalsocitedaspartof anoration(of
which§1.202isanother part) in the mosque in Basra, a few days after the
Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 235). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 254 Text and
Translation يرجعون وإلى الخلف الباقي لا يبقون أوَلستم ترون أهل الدنيا
يمسون ويصبحون على بلاطودوجيهسفنبرخآودوعيدئاعوىلتبمعيرصوىّزعُ يرخآوىكبُ
يتّيمفىّتشلاوحأ للدنيا والموت يطلبه وغافل وليس بمغفول عنه وعلى أثر الماضي
ما يمضي الباقي. ألا فٱذ كروا هادم اللذات ومنغّص الشهوات وقاطع الأمنيّات
عند المساورة للأعمال القبيحة وٱستعينوا الله على أداء واجب حقّه وما لا
يحصى من أعداد نعمه وإحسانه. 1.97ومن خطبة له عليه السلام الحمد لله الناشر
في الخلق فضله والباسط فيهم بالجود يده. نحمده في جميع أموره ونستعينه على
رعاية حقوقه. ونشهد أن لا إل ٰ ه غيره١ وأنّ محمّدًا عبده ورسوله أرسله بأمره
صادعًا وبذ قَرَم اهمّدقت نم ّقحلا ةيار انيف فّلخو اًديشر ىضمو اً نيمأ ىّدأف
اًقطان هرك َ ومن تخلّف عنها زَهَقَ ومن لزمها لَحِقَ دليلها مكيث الكلام بطيء
القيام سريع إذا قام فإذا هللا ءاش ام هدعب متثبلف هب بهذف توملا هءاج
مكعباصأب هيلإ مترشأو مكباقر هل مُتْنَ لَأ متنأ حتّىيطلعاللهلـكممنيجمعكمويضمّ
نشر كم.فلاتطمعوافيغيرمقبلولاتيأسوامنمدبر فإنّ المدبر عسى أن تزلّ إحدى
قائمتيه وتثبت الأخرى فترجعا حتّى تثبتا جميعًا. ألا إنّ مثلآلمحمّدصل ّ
ىاللهعليهوآلهوسلّمكمثلنجومالسماءإذاخوىنجمطلعنجم.فكأنّكم قد تكاملت من الله
فيكم الصنائع وأراكم ما كنتم تأملون. 1.98ومن خطبة له عليه السلام وهي من
خطبه التي تشتمل على ذ كر الملاحم ١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ي،ونسخةفيم:كذا.وأصلم:
⟩غيرالله⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
255 Haven't you seen that those who pass away don't return, and that
you, their heirs, will not remain forever? Don't you see the people of
this world, at dusk and at dawn, in disparate states? One dead and
lamented, another bereaved, one struck and afflicted, another giving up
the ghost, one who seeks this world when death seeks him, another
heedless who goes not unheeded? In truth, those who remain walk in the
traces of those who have passed. Hark! Before you rush to do evil,
remember the destroyer of pleasures, the slasher of pas- sions, and the
slayer of hopes. Seek God's help in offering him what you owe for his
incalculable blessings and abundant favors. 1.97 From an oration by
ʿAlī:1 Praise God who extended his grace to all creatures and stretched
out his hand to them with generous gifts. We praise him in all his
affairs and seek his help in guarding his rights. We bear witness that
there is no god other than he, and that Muḥammad is his servant and
messenger, whom he sent to transmit his command and express his
remembrance. He discharged the trust with honor, and died having guided
us, having bequeathed to us the banner of truth; who- ever gets ahead of
it strays, whoever holds back from it perishes, and whoever remains
beneath it catches up with those who have gone ahead.The guide who
carries it is deliberate when speaking, measured when rising, and swift
once risen,2 but when you have bent your necks to him fully and pointed
toward him with your fingers,3 death will come to him, and he will be
taken away. You will remain after him in this manner for as long as God
wills, until he brings to you one who will unite you again and gather
your scattered fragments. So do not keep hoping for a man to step up who
is not going to, but do not despair of one who has turned away. Though
he may have turned away because one foot slipped, the other could be
stable, and both feet could once again stand firm. Hark! Muḥammad's
descendants are like stars in the firmament: if one sets, another rises.
The time is near and has almost arrived---the time when God's blessings
will reach perfection, and when he will show you what you hope to see.
1.98 From one of ʿAlī's orations containing narratives of epic
fighting:4 1 ʿAlī's third Friday sermon delivered after becoming caliph,
presumably in Medina, 35/656. Ḥ 7:93. 2 Referring to himself. Ḥ7:85; B
408. 3 The commentaries state that "pointing with fingers" means that
"people recognized ʿAlī as ruler." Ḥ7:94; B 408. 4 Part of an
oration---that includes §1.99 and §1.126---which ʿAlī delivered in Basra
immedi- ately after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656. B 480; ʿAbd
al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir, 2:202, 203, 288. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 256 Text
and Translation 1.98.1الأوّلقبلكلّ أوّلوالآخربعدكلّ
آخر.بأوّليتهوجبأنلاأوّللهوبآخريّته وجب أن لا آخر له وأشهد أن لا إل ٰ ه إلّا
الله شهادة يوافق فيها السرّ الإعلان والقلب اللسان. 1.98.2راصبألاب اومارتت
الو ينايصع مكّنيوهتسي الو﴾يِقاَقِش ْمُكَ ّنَمِرْجَي اَل﴿ سانلا اهّيأ
عندماتسمعونهمنّيفوالذيفلقالحبّةوبرأالنسمةإنّ الذيأنبّئكمبهعنالنبيّصل ّ ىالله
عليه وآله. ما كذب المبلّغ ولا جهل السامع. 1.98.3لكأن ّ ي أنظر إلى ضِلّيل قد
ن َ عَقَ بالشام وفحص براياته في ضواحي كوفان فإذا ف َ غَر َ ت ْ فاغرته
وٱشتدّت شكيمته وثقلت في الأرض وطأته عضّت الفتنة أبناءها بأنيابها وماجت
الحرب بأمواجها وبدا من الأيّام كُلوحُها ومن الليالي كُدوحُها فإذا يَنَعَ زرعه
وقام على يَنْعِه وهدرت شقاشقه وبرقت بوارقه عُقدت رايات الفتن المعضلة وأقبلن
كالليل المظلم والبحر الملتطم. هذا و كم يخرق الـكوفة من قاصف ويمرّعليها من
فتلَ ت ليلق نعو فصاع ّ القرون بالقرون ويُحصَد القائم ويُحطَم المحصود. 1.99ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام تجري هذا المجرى 1.99.1وذلك يوم يجمع الله فيه الأوّلين
والآخرين لنِقاش الحساب وجزاء الأعمال َ مَ جْلَأ دق اًمايق اًعوضخ هم العرق
ورجفت بهم الأرض فأحسنهم حالًا من وجد لقدميه موضعًا ولنفسه متّسعًا. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
257 1.98.1 He is the first before every first and the last after every
last, his firstness dictates that he has no beginning, and his lastness
dictates that he has no end. I bear witness that there is no god but
God; my thoughts match my declaration, my heart matches my tongue.
1.98.2 People! «Let not your enmity of me drive you to accuse me of
lies»1 or seduce you into disobeying me---and do not look at one another
so when you hear me speak these words! I swear by him who split open the
seed and created the living being that what I say to you comes from the
Prophet---that speaker did not lie, and this listener did not forget.
1.98.3 AwickedmanwillcallouttohisflockinSyriaandscrapesthegroundfor his
banners to roost in the hinterlands of Kufa---I can almost see him!2
When his maw has opened wide, his defiance has become strong, and he
stamps his feet with violence, sedition will sink its fangs into the
city's children, waves of war will swell, the days will scowl, and the
nights will maim. Then, with sedi- tion's fruit fully ripened, its
thunderclaps booming and its lightning flashing, its obdurate banners
will become ranged in tight ranks and march like the dark
night,likethesurgingsea.Allthiswillhappen.Howmanywindswillsweepinto
Kufa! How many storms will lash into her! Soon, very soon, horn will
lock with horn. All who stand will be harvested, and all that is
harvested will be crushed. 1.99 From an oration by ʿAlī with similar
content:3 1.99.1 On that day, God will assemble all who went before and
all who came after, standing, necks bowed, to be interrogated for the
judgment and receive payback for their deeds. Sweat will streak their
cheeks like straps of a bridle, and the ground beneath them will
tremble. The best any man can hope for is space for his feet and room
for his frame.4 1 Qurʾan, Hūd 11:89. 2
ThecommentatorsstatethatthisprophecyrefersmostlikelytothefifthUmayyadcaliphʿAbd
al-Malik ibn Marwān (r. 65--86/685--705), or perhaps to Muʿāwiyah, or
the Antichrist. B 401, Ḥ7:99--100. The first few lines are similar to
§1.136.3. 3 Part of an oration---that includes §1.98 and §1.126---which
ʿAlī delivered in Basra immedi- ately after the Battle of the Camel in
36/656. B 480; ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir, 2:202, 203, 288. 4 Ar. nafs,
translatedhereas"frame,"alsomeans"life,""person," and
"soul."Differentlyvocalized as nafas, it can also mean "breath" (Ibn
Manẓūr, Lisān, s.v. "N-F-S"). My translation is based on Ḥ7:102; B 411.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 258 Text and
Translation 1.99.2منها اهزفحي ةلوحرم ةمومزم مكيتأت ةيار اهل ّدرُ ت الو
ةمئاق اهل موقت ال ملظملا ليللا عطقك نتف ّ لذأ موق هللا يف مهدهاجي مهُبَ لَس
ليلق مهُبَ لَك ديدش موق اهلهأ اهبكار اهدهجيو اهدئاق ة عند المتكبّرين في
الأرض مجهولون وفي السماء معروفون فويلٌ لك يا بصرة عند ذلك من جيش من نقم
الله لا رَهَجَ له ولا حس ّ وسيبتلى أهلك بالموت الأحمر والجوع الأغبر.
1.100ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.100.1انظروا إلى الدنيا نظر الزاهدين فيها
الصادفين عنها فإنّها والله عمّا قليل تزيل الثاوي الساكن وتفجع المترف الآمن
لا يرجع ما تول ّ ى منها فأدبر ولا ي ُ درى ما هو آت َ لَجو نزحلاب بوشم
اهرورس رظتنُ يف اهنم ٍ د الرجال فيها إلى الضعف والوهن فلا تغرّنّكم كثرة ما
يعجبكم فيها لقل ّ ة ما يصحبكم منها. رحم الله ٱمرأ ً تفكّر فٱعتبر وٱعتبر
فأبصر فكأنّ ما هو كائن من الدنيا عن قليل لم يكن وكأنّ ما هو كائن من الآخرة
عمّا قليل لم يزل وكلّ معدود منقَضٍ وكلّ متوقّع آت ٍ وكلّ آت ٍ قريب دانٍ.
1.100.2منها العالم من عرف قدره وكفى بالمرء جهل ً ا ألّا يعرف قدره وإنّ من
أبغض الرجال إلى الله لعبد وكّله الله إلى نفسه جائر عن قصد السبيل سائر
بغير دليل إن دعي إلى حرث الدنيا عمل أو إلى حرث الآخرةكسل كأنّ ما عمل له
واجب عليه وكأنّ ما وَنى فيه ساقط عنه. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 259 1.99.2 From the same oration:1 Seditions will approach
like hosts of darkness---no horse will be able to with- stand them, and
no banner of theirs will be repelled. Advancing like bridled and saddled
warhorses, they will be urged on by their drivers, and pushed hard by
their riders, a rabid group with little appetite for stopping at
plunder. Those who fight them for God will be a force deemed lowly by
the arrogant, unrecog- nized on earth but eminent in the hereafter.
Basra, you will be afflicted at that time with an army that brings God's
chastisement, an army that neither raises dust nor makes any sound.Your
inhabitants will be stricken with red death and black hunger. 1.100 From
an oration by ʿAlī:2 1.100.1 Look at the world with the eyes of those
who have little interest in her and who turn away from her. By God, she
will soon evict her tenants and afflict the complacent and secure.That
part which turns away and leaves never returns, while that part which
you think is approaching is not guaranteed to arrive. Her happiness is
blemished with grief, and men's strength, as they con- tinue to live in
her bosom, deteriorates intoweaknessand incapacity. Do not be beguiled
by her many beauties, for her companionship is short-lived. May God have
mercy on the man who reflects and takes heed, and who, taking heed,
discerns! In a short while, it will be as though this world never was,
as if the hereafter has already come. All that is tallied will run out,
all that is expected will be, and all that will be is at hand. 1.100.2
From the same oration: The learned man knows his worth---suffice it as a
mark of ignorance when a man does not know his worth. Among the most
hateful of men in God's eyes is a person whom God has given up on, a
person he has left to his own devices, who strays from the straight
path, and wanders without a guide. If called on to cultivate the fields
of this world, he works hard, but if called on to cultivate the fields
of the hereafter, he is lazy. He behaves as though the things he works
for are mandatory, but the things in which he is remiss are an
unpleasant burden that he is not required to carry. 1
Thecommentatorsstatethatthissectionprophesieseither(1)end-of-timeapocalypticevents
(Ḥ7:104), or (2) the Zanj Rebellion (B 411--412). Led by the "Chief of
the Zanj," ʿAlī b. Muḥam-
mad,this15-yearrebellioninsouthernIraq(255--270/869--883)caused"innumerablematerial
losses and tens of thousands of lives." Popovic, "al-Zand̲j̲: (ii) The
Zand̲j̲ revolts in ʿIrāḳ,"ei2. 2 Kulaynī (Kāfī, 8:17) cites §1.100.1 in a
set of lines with which "the Commander of the Faithful used to counsel
his supporters." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 260 Text and
Translation 1.100.3منها َ رعُ ي مل دهش نإ ةَموُ ن نمؤم ّلك اّلإ هيف وجني ال
نامز كلذو ف وإن غاب لم ي ُ فتقَد أولئك َ ملاب اوسيل ىرُ ّسلا مالعأو ىدهلا
حيباصم ساييح ولا الم َ ذاييع الب ُ ذُر أولئك يفتح الله لهم أبواب رحمته
ويكشف عنهم ضرّاء نقمته. أيّها الناس سيأتي عليكم زمان ي ُ كفَأ فيه الإسلام
كما ي ُ كفَأ الإناء بما فيه. أيّها الناس إنّ الله قد أعاذ كم من أن يجور
عليكم ولم يعذ كم ِ لٰذ يِف َ ّن ِإ﴿ لئاق نم ّلج لاق دقو مكيلتبي نأ نم كَ
لآيَات .﴾نيِ لَ تْبُ مَ ل اَ ّ نُك ن ِإَو ٍ 1.100.4أمّا قوله عليه السلام ⟩كلّ مؤمن
نومة⟨فإنّما أراد به الخامل الذ كر القليل الشرّ. و⟩المساييح⟨جمع مِسْياح وهو
الذي يسيح بين الناس بالفساد والنمائم. و⟩المذاييع⟨جمع مِذْياع ُ بلا⟩و .اهبَهَ
ّوَ نو اهعاذأ ةشحافب هريغل عمس اذإ يذلا وهو ذُر⟨جمع ب َ ذُور وهو الذي يكثر
سَفَهُه .هقطنم وُغْلَ يو 1.101ومن خطبة له عليه السلام وقد تقدّم مختارها بخلاف
هذه الرواية أمّا بعد. فإنّ الله سبحانه بعث محمّدًا صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
وليس أحد من العرب يقرأ ردابيو مهتاجنم ىلإ مهقوسي هاصع نم هعاطأ نمب لتاقف
اً يحو الو ةّوبن يعّدي الو اًباتك بهم الساعة أن تنزل بهم يَحْس َ ر الحسير ويقف
الـكسير فيقيم عليه حتّى يلحقه غايته إلّا هالكًا لا خير فيه حتّى أراهم
منجاتهم وبوّأهم محلّتهم فٱستدارت رحاهم وٱستقامت ّ لوت ىّتح اهِتَ قاس نم تنك
دقل هللا ميٱو .مهتانق ت بحذافيرها وٱستوسقت ُ في قيادها ما ضعفت ُ ولا
جبنت ولا خنت ولا وهنت. وٱيم الله لَأَبْقُر َ نّ الباطل حتّى أُخرج الحقّ من
خاصرته. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
261 1.100.3 From the same oration: A time will come when only humble
believers are safe,1 not recognized if present and not missed when
absent. They are lamps of guidance and way- marks for travelers, never
gossipmongers or blabbering slanderers. God will open the gates of his
mercy for them and offer protection from the blows of his punishment.
People! A time will come upon you when Islam is overturned, just as a
vessel is overturned, with its water poured away. People! God has
promised to protect you against his injustice, but he has not promised
to protect you against his trials. He, the most glorious of speakers,
has said: «Truly there are signs in that, truly we shall put you to the
test.»2 1.100.4 Raḍī: By the words, "every humble believer (kullu
muʾminin nūmah)," ʿAlī meant a person whom no one mentions and who does
no one harm. "Masāyīḥ(gossip- mongers)" is the plural of misyāḥ, one who
goes around spreading discord and defama- tion. "Madhāyīʿ (slanderers)"
is the plural of midhyāʿ, one who, whenever he hears of a person having
committed an immoral act, circulates and disseminates it. "Budhur
(blabberers)" is the plural of badhūr, one whose levity is excessive and
whose speech is nonsensical. 1.101 From an oration by ʿAlī of which some
parts have previously been cited in a vari- ant form:3
GodsentMuḥammadasaprophetwhennoArabreadscriptureorclaimedrev- elation
and prophecy. Mustering those who obeyed him, he fought those who
disobeyed, herding all to their place of refuge and hastening to set
them on the right path before the final hour arrived. He raised the
weary and nurtured the broken, until, except for those bereft of any
good who perished, he had guided them all to their goal, shown them
their refuge, and brought them into a safe enclosure, where their
handmills spun and their lances straightened. By God, I was one of those
who fought the Age of Ignorance until its battalions fled and Islam's
forces were corralled,4 never holding back out of weakness, cow- ardice,
disloyalty, or impotence. By God, I shall impale falsehood's torso until
truth emerges from its flank. 1 Ar. nūmah, translated here as "humble,"
is alternatively vocalized as nuwamah, "those who sleep a lot." B 414. 2
Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:30. 3 This oration is a variant of §1.33, specified
there as delivered "when ʿAlī marched on the peo- ple of Basra." See
also Mufīd, Irshād, 247. 4 This line contains only pronouns, which I
have replaced based on the commentaries: "Age of Ignorance" for "the
earlier age," and "Islam's forces" for "our forces." Ḥ7:116; B 415; R
339; Gh 2:108. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 262 Text and
Translation 1.102ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.102.1حتّى بعث الله محمّدًا صل ّ
ى الله عليه وآله وسلّم شهيدًا وبشيرًا ونذيرًا خير البريّة طفل ً ا وأنجبها كهل
ً ا أطهر المطهّرين شيمة وأجود المستمطرين ديمة. فما ٱحلولت لـكم الدنيا في
لذّتها ولا تمكّنتم من رَضاع أخلافها إلّا من بعده.١ صادفتموها جائل ً ا خطامها
قلقًا وضينها قد صار حرامها عند أقوام بمنزلة السدر المخضود وحلالها بعيدًا
غير موجود اهيف مكيديأو ةرغاش مكـل ضرألاف دودعم لجأ ىلإ اًدودمم اً ّلظ
هللاو اهومتفداصو مبسوطة وأيدي القادة عنكم مكفوفة وسيوفكم عليهم مسلّطة
وسيوفهم عنكم مقبوضة. هللاوهوهسفن ّقحيفمكاحلاكانئامديفرئاثلا ّنإواً بلاط
ّقح ّلكلواًرئاثمد ّلكل ّنإالأ اهّنُ فرعتل ليلق اّمع ةّيمأ ينب اي هللاب مسقُأف
.بره نم هتوفي الو بلط نَم هزجعي ال يذلا في أيدي غير كم وفي دار عدوّكم ألا
وإنّ أبصر الأبصار ما نفذ في الخـير طرفه ألا إنّ أسمع الأسماع ما وَعى التذ
.هَ لِبَ قو ريك 1.102.2أيّها الناس ٱستصبحوا من شعلة مصباح واعظ متّعظ وٱمتاحوا
من صفو عين قد رُوّقت من الـكدر. عباد الله لا تركنوا إلى جهالتكم ولا
تنقادوا لأهوائكم فإنّ النازل بهذا المنزل نازل بـ»شَفَا جُرُف ٍ هَارٍ« ينقل
الردى على ظهره من موضع إلى موضع لرأي يحدثه بعد رأي يريد أن يلصق ما لا
يلتصق ويقرّب ما لا يتقارب. فالله َ الله َأن تشكوا إلى من لا يبكي٢ شَجْوَكم
ولا ينقض برأيه ما قد أبرم لـكم. إنّه ليس على الإمام إلّا ما حمّل من أمر ربّه
الإبلاغ في الموعظة والاجتهاد في النصيحة والإحياء
١م،ش،ن،ي،ھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.مصحّحةفيش،م: ⟩بعدما⟨. ٢م،ي،ھ،ونسخة
فيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ونسخةفيم،ھ: ⟩يشكي⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 263 1.102 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.102.1 God sent
Muḥammad as a witness, a herald, and a warner.2 As a child, he was the
best of the entire world, as a man, the most noble, purest of the pure
in character, the most generous of all rainclouds. Until he came,3 you
had neither tasted the world's sweetness nor succeeded in milking its
teats. But afterward, when its halter was loose and its girth slack,4
some of you turned what he had forbidden into a «laden lote tree»,5 and
what he had made law- ful into a distant fancy. You found the world to
be a cool, spreading shade: the
earthdefenselessbeforeyouraggression,yourhandsreachingouttograbitand the
hands of just leaders restrained, your swords on their necks, their
swords forcibly sheathed. Be warned! For every life taken vengeance will
be sought, for
everyrightabusedredresswillbepursued.OuravengerisnoneotherthanGod, who
will be both petitioner and judge. No one he seeks eludes him, no one
who fleesescapes.ByGod,Umayyads!Soonyouwillseeruleinthehandsof another,
in the house of your enemy. Listen now! For the keenest eye kens good
and the sharpest ear heeds counsel. 1.102.2 People! Light your lamp from
the flame of one who gives counsel and heeds it, draw your water from a
spring that is unmuddied and pure.6 Servants of God! Do not rest on your
ignorance or follow your caprice for that camper encamps at «the lip of
a crumbling cliff».7 As he moves from place to place, as he innovates
one heresy then another, as he tries to glue two things that cannot
bond,asheworkstojointwothingsthatarefarapart,hecarrieshisdoomonhis back.
Fear God, and do not take your complaints to one who does not feel your
pain, who cannot undo with his makeshift ruling a mandated rule. A
leader's duties are those with which God has charged him: he must
counsel the people 1 ʿAlī delivered this oration in Medina in 35/656,
five days after allegiance was pledged to him as caliph. ʿAlī ibn
Ibrāhīm al-Qummī, Tafsīr, 1:384. 2 Modified quote from Qurʾan, Aḥzāb
33:45.The Arabic begins with ḥattā ("until"), presumably
connectingfromanearliersectionontheconditionof
peoplejustbeforethecomingof Islam. 3 Ar. min baʿdihi: "until he came,"
addressing the early Muslims (H 7:119); or: "until he had gone,"
addressing the Umayyads (B 105). Or, if reading the text as min baʿdi
mā, as in some manu- scripts, the sentence would connect to the next
word and read as "You did not taste ... until after you had earlier
found the world to have a loose halter." 4 I.e., difficult to ride,
referring to the upheavals in the leadership of the Muslim empire after
Muḥammad. Ḥ7:119. 5 Ar. sidr makhḍūḍ. Qurʾan, Wāqiʿah 56:28; Ḥ7:119; R
1:449; B 417. 6 Referring to himself. Ḥ7:168; B 418. 7 Qurʾan, Tawbah
9:109. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 264 Text and
Translation لبق نم ملعلا اوردابف .اهلهأ ىلع نامْهُ ّسلا رادصإو اهيّقحتسم
ىلع دودحلا ةماقإو ةّنسلل تصويح نبته ومن قبل أن تشغلوا بأنفسكم عن مستثار
العلم من عند أهله وٱنهوا عن المنكر وتناهوا عنه فإنّما أمرتم بالنهي بعد
التناهي. 1.103ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.103.1الحمدللهالذيشرعالإسلامفسهّلشرائعهلمنوردهوأعزّ أركانهعلىمنغالبه ِ لَ
ع نمل اً نمأ هلعجف نمل اًرونو هب مصاخ نمل اًدهاشو هب مّلكت نمل اًناهربو هلخد
نمل اً مْلِسو هَق ظعّتٱنملةربعومزعنملةرصبتومّسوتنملةيآورّبدتنملاً ّبُ
لولقعنملاًمهفوهبءاضتسٱ
ونجاةلمنصدّقوثقةلمنتوكّلوراحةلمنفوّضوجُنّةلمنصبر.فهوأبلجالمناهجواضح الولائج
مشرف المنار مشرق الجوادّ مضيء المصابيح كريم المضمار رفيع الغاية جامع
توملاو هرانم تاحلاصلاو هجاهنم قيدصتلا .ناسرفلا فيرش ةقْب َ ّسلا سفانتم
ةبْلَ حلا .هتقْبَس ةّنَ جلاو هتَ بَ لَح ةمايقلاو هرامضم ايندلاو هتياغ 1.103.2منها
في ذ كر النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه وآله al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
265 to good purpose, exert effort in giving advice, keep alive the
Sunnah, punish those who commit crimes, and distribute treasury stipends
fairly. People, has- ten to pluck knowledge before its plant withers,
seek to acquire knowledge from its keepers before preoccupations
distract, forbid evil and desist from it, for you have been commanded to
desist before forbidding others. 1.103 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.103.1
Praise God who paved the path of Islam, made it smooth for those who
come to its waterholes, and protected its ramparts from attackers. He
made it a source of security for those who cling to it, a place of
safety for those who enter it, a proof for those who argue by it, a
witness for those who litigate with it, a light for those who seek
illumination by it, comprehension for those who understand, reason for
those who ponder, a sign for those who search for pasture,2 perception
for those who resolve to advance, a lesson for those who take heed,
salvation for those who believe, support for those who trust, com- fort
for those who submit, and a shield for those who endure. Islam's paths
are lit, its trails marked,3 its beacons high, its highway bright, its
lamps aglow, its arena honorable, its goal elevated, its racehorses
numerous, its prize sought, and its champions noble. Its path is faith,
its road good deeds, its end death, its racecourse the world, its track
the day of resurrection, and its prize par- adise. 1.103.2 From the same
oration in praise of the Prophet:4 1 Excerpt from an oration that ʿAlī
delivered in his home, either in Medina or Kufa, additional parts of
which are recorded as §1.69, and sayings §3.26 (about the four pillars
of belief) and §3.259 (ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir, 4:214--216). It is
related that ʿAlī was asked by an associate to describe belief (īmān),
and ʿAlī instructed him to come back the next day, so that others could
hear it too. He did return, presumably with others. ʿAlī then delivered
this oration and instructed that it be written down and read out to the
public (Kulaynī, Kāfī, 2:49). Kulaynī (ibid.) names the associate as
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Kawwāʾ, while Ghazālī (Iḥyāʾ¸ 4:60) names him
asʿAmmāribnYāsir(if
so,theorationwouldhavebeendeliveredbeforeṢiffīn,in37/657,when ʿAmmār was
killed). Alternatively, §1.103.1 is also cited as an answer given during
an oration in the mosque in Basra, a few days after the Battle of the
Camel in 36/656 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 224--225). Other parts of the same
oration in ibid., 221--233 are listed in note to §1.23. §1.103.1 is
similar to §1.154.2. 2 Or, for those who perceive hidden things
(tafarrasa). B 420; R 1:455; Ḥ7:122. 3 Or, its inner workings are clear.
B 420. 4 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ7:174--175) remarks that none of the
Prophet's Companions praised the Prophet and prayed for him after his
death as passionately as ʿAlī did, just as no one aided and served the
Prophet during his lifetime as sincerely as ʿAlī and his family did.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 266 Text and
Translation نيدلا موي كديهشو نومأملا كنيمأ وهف سباحل اً مَ لَ ع رانأو سباقل
اًسبق ىرْوَأ ىّتح وبعيثك نعمة ورسولك بالحقّ رحمة. اللّٰهمّ ٱقسم له مقسمًا من عدلك
وٱجزه مضعّفات كدنع فّرشو هلُزُ ن كيدل مركأو هءانب نينابلا ءانب ىلع ِلْعَأ
ّمهّٰللا .كلضف نم ريـخلا منزله وآته الوسيلة وأعطه السناء والفضيلة وٱحشرنا
في زمرته غير خزايا ولا نادمين ولا .نينوتفم الو نيّ لاض الو نيثكان الو
نيبكان وقد مضى هذا الكلام فيما تقدّم إلّا أنّنا كرّرناه هٰهنا لما في
الروايتين من الاختلاف. 1.103.3منها في خطاب أصحابه وقد بلغتم من كرامة
الله لـكم منزلة تكرم بها إماؤ كم وتوصل بها جيرانكم ويعظّمكم من لا فضل
لـكم عليه ولا ي َ دَ لـكم عنده ويهابكم من لا يخاف لـكم سطوة ولا لـكم عليه
إمرة. وقد ترون عهود الله منقوضة فلا تغضبون وأنتم لنقض ذمم آبائكم تأنفون.
وكانت أمور مكتّمزأ مهيلإ متيقلأو مكتلزنم نم ةمَ ل َ ّظلا متنّكمف عجرت
مكيلإو ردصت مكنعو درت مكيلع هللا
وأسلمتمأموراللهفيأيديهميعملونبالشبهاتويسيرون١فيالشهوات.وٱيماللهلوفرّقو كم
تحت كلّ كوكب لجمعكم الله لشرّيوم لهم. 1.104ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في بعض
أيّام صفّين وقد رأيت جولتكم وٱنحياز كم عن صفوفكم تحوز كم الجفاة الطغام
وأعراب أهل الشام ىفش دقلو .مظعألا مانسلاو مّدقملا فنألاو فرشلا خيفآيو
برعلا ميماهَ ل متنأو ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩تعملون ...تسيرون⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
267 Heignitedtheflameof truthforanywhosoughtaburningbrandandlittorches
on the road to paradise for those who had tied up their camels not
knowing where to go. He is the trustee whom you, God, entrusted with
your message, your witness on judgment day, your emissary sent as a
blessing, and your mes- senger dispatched with the truth as the
embodiment of mercy. God, bestow on him a bounteous share of your
justice, and reward him with a munificent recompense, multiplied
manifold by your generosity. God, let his palace tower high above all
others, provide him a noble place near you, honor his station at your
side, bestow him the right of intercession, grant him radiance and
excellence, and resurrect us in his company---let us not be people of
dishonor, remorse, deviation, violation, or error, or those who succumb
to sedition. Raḍī:This passage was narrated earlier.1 I have repeated it
here because the two reports vary in some of their language. 1.103.3
From the same oration addressing his associates: It is through God's
bounty that you have attained this high standing, in which your slave
girls are honored, and your neighbors receive gifts, where you are
revered by people to whom you have given no special favors or grants,
while others stand in your awe who have no reason to fear your attack
and over whom you have no command. Yet here you see God's compacts
broken and are not roused to anger, while when your ancestors'
traditions are rent, you profess outrage. God's affairs used to frequent
your waterhole, but you have relinquished your station to tyrants, and
entrusted your guide ropes to them. You have surrendered God's affairs
into their hands, as they implement their dubious actions and walk in
the path of their passions. But, by God, even if they strew you beneath
every distant star, God will reunite you, on an evil day for them. 1.104
From an oration ʿAlī delivered during one of the battle-days of Ṣiffīn:2
I saw you turn away from your battle lines and fall back, pushed away by
the rough rabble and common Bedouins of Syria, you, the aristocracy of
the Arabs, the summit of nobility, the bridge of its nose, and its lofty
hump! But my racing heart was calmed when later I saw you push them back
as they had pushed 1 §1.69. 2 Ṣiffīn, 37/657. At one point during the
battle, ʿAlī's right wing fell back. Ashtar, prompted by ʿAlī, addressed
them with a rousing oration, and they returned to fight and routed the
Syrians. ʿAlī then addressed them with the oration at hand. Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 5:19--25; Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 149. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 268 Text
and Translation وَحاوِحَ صدري أن رأيتكم بِأَخَرة تحوزونهم كما حازو كم
وتزيلونهم عن مواقفهم كما أزالو ىمرتةدورطملاميهلالبإلاكمهارخأمهالوُأبَكرَ
تحامرلاباً رْجَشولاصنلابا ً ّسَحمك عن حياضها وتذاد عن مواردها. 1.105ومن خطبة
له عليه السلام وهي من خطب الملاحم 1.105.1الحمد لله المتجل ّ ي لخلقه
بخلقه والظاهر لقلوبهم بحجّته خلق الخلق من غير رويّة إذ كانت الرويّات لا
تليق إلّا بذوي الضمائر وليس بذي ضمير في نفسه خرق علمه باطن غيب السترات
وأحاط بغموض عقائد السريرات. 1.105.2منها في ذ كر النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله اختارهمنشجرةالأنبياءومشكاةالضياءوذُؤابةالعلياءوس ُ
رّةالبطحاءومصابيحالظلمة وينابيع الحكمة. منها طبيب ٌ دوّار بطبّه قد أحكم
مراهمه وأحمى١ مواسمه يضع ذلك حيث الحاجة إليه من قلوب عمي وآذان صمّ وألسنة
ب ُ كْم متتبّع بدوائه مواضع الغفلة ومواطن الحـيرة لم يستضيئوا بأضواء
الحكمة ولم يقدحوا بزناد العلوم الثاقبة فهم في ذلك كالأنعام السائمة
والصخور القاسية قد ٱنجابت السرائر لأهل البصائر ووضحت محجّة الحقّ لخابطها٢
وأسفرت الساعة عن وجهها وظهرت العلامة لمتوسّمها. مالي أراكم أشباحًا بلا
أرواح اً بَ ّيُغ اًدوهشو اًمَ ّوُ ن اًظاقيأو حابرأ الب اًراّجتو حالص الب اًكاّسنو
حابشأ الب اًحاورأو ُ ب ةقطانو اً ّمص ةعماسو اً يمع ةرظانو .اهبعشب تقّرفتو
اهبطق ىلع تماق دق ةلالض ةيأر .اً مْك ١ش، ن، ي، ھ، ومصحّحة في م: كذا. أصل م:
⟩وأمضى⟨. ٢ش، ن، ي، ھ، ونسخة في م: كذا.أصلم: ⟩لأهلها⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
269 you earlier, forcing them from their positions as they had forced
you earlier, striking them with arrows and thrusting at them with
spears, shoving the men in their front rows bodily onto the heads and
chests of the men in the rows behind them, like parched camels driven
from the waterhole and pushed away from drink. 1.105 From an oration by
ʿAlī with prophecies of future calamities: 1.105.1 Praise God, who
appears to his creation through his creation and mani- fests himself to
their hearts through his proof. He created without cogitation or
thought, for cogitation and thought only come from those who have an
inner disposition---and God does not possess an inner disposition in his
self. His knowledge rends the hidden veils of mystery and encompasses
beliefs stored in the innermost recesses of peoples' hearts. 1.105.2
From the same oration in praise of the Prophet:
Godselectedhimfromthetreeof prophets,thelamp-nicheof illumination,the
forelock of majesty, and the navel of Baṭḥāʾ,1 from the lamps in the
darkness, and the wellsprings of wisdom. From the same oration: He was a
physician who carried his medicine from place to place.2 He had pre-
pared ointments and heated his cauteries, and he used them to heal the
hearts of the blind, the ears of the deaf, and the tongues of the dumb,
as called for by their needs. He sought out for his medicine places of
heedlessness and locales of perplexity never illumined by the light of
wisdom or sparked by the flints of glinting erudition.They had been like
untended cattle and hard rocks, but then
secretpurposesbecameplainfortheperceptive,theroadof truthbecameclear for
those who had been stumbling in the dark, the imminent hour unveiled its
face, and fluttering banners came into sight for those looking for
signs. Why is it that I see you as bodies without souls and souls
without bodies, ascetics without piety and merchants without profit,
awake yet asleep and present yet absent, seeing yet blind, hearing yet
deaf, and speaking yet dumb? There will rise a banner of error,
entrenched in its socket, spreading its streamers, mea- suring you with
its yardstick, and striking you with outstretched hand, and its leader
will be a man who has forsaken the faith to establish his errant claim.
1 Baṭḥāʾ---lit. "the flatland"---is another name for Mecca. 2 Or, "I am
a physician ..." B 425. The pronoun is implied, not explicit, and the
physician could be a reference to the Prophet or to ʿAlī himself.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 270 Text and
Translation ت َ كِيلـ ُ كم بصاعها وتخبطكم بباعها. قائدها١ خارج من المل ّ
ة قائم على الضِّل ّ ة. فلا يبقى يومئذ منكمإلّاث ُ فالةكثفالةالقِدْرأون ُ
فاضةكنفاضةالعِكْمت َ عْر ُ ككمعَرْكالأديموتدوسكمدَوْس الحصيد وتستخلص المؤمنَ من
بينكم ٱستخلاص الطير الحبّة البطينة من بين هَزيل الحب نوَ تؤت نيأ نمو
بذاوكـلا مكعدختو بهايغلا مكب هيتتو بهاذملا مكب بهذت نيأ . ّ َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ
نَأ﴿و كُونَ﴾. و﴿ل ِ باَ تِك ٍلَجَأ ِّلُك ٌ ﴾ولكلّ غيبة إياب.
1.105.3فٱستمعوامنربّانيّكموأحضروهقلوبكموٱستيقظواإنهتفبكموليصدقرائد َ رَ خلا
َقْلَ ف رمألا مكـل قلف دقلف هنهذ رضحيلو هلمش عمجيلو هلهأ زة وقرفه قرف الص
ةغْم َ ّ فعندذلكأخذالباطلمآخذهوركبالجهلمراكبهوعظمتالطاغيةوقلّتالداعية وصال
الدهر صِيال السَب ُ ىلع سانلا ىخاوتو موظُك دعب لطابلا قينَ ف ردهو روقعلا ع
الفجور وتهاجروا على الدين وتحابّوا على الـكذب وتباغضوا على الصدق فإذا كان
ذلك لهأ ٢ناكو اًضيغ ماركـلا ضيغتو اًضيف مائللا ضيفتو اًظيَ ق رطملاو اًظيَغ
دلولا ناك ذلك الزمان ذئابًا وسلاطينه سباعًا وأوساطه أُكّالًا وفقراؤه أمواتًا
وغار٣ الصدق وفاض الـكذب وٱست ُ اً بسن قوسفلا راصو بولقلاب سانلا رجاشتو
ناسللاب ةّدوملا تلمع .اًبولقم وْرَفلا سْبُ ل مالسإلا سبلو اً بجع فافعلاو
1.106ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.106.1كلّ شيء خاشع له وكلّ شيء قائم به غنى
كلّ فقير وعزّ كلّ ذليل وقوّةكلّ ضعيف ومفزع كلّ ملهوف من تكلّم سمع نطقه ومن سكت
علم سرّه ومن عاش فعليه ُ تف ُنويعلا كَرَ ت مل .هبلقنم هيلإف تام نمو هقزر
خبرَعنك بل كنت قبل الواصفين من ١ش،ن،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩قائمها⟨.
٢ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩عاد⟨. ٣ش، ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩غاض⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
271 On that day, those of you who remain standing will be as sediments
in a cook- ing pot, or fluffs of wool after bales are packed.The
sedition will scrape you like
tannedleather,stampyoulikeharvestedgrain,pickingoutthebelieversamong you
as a bird picks out plump kernels from a dried-up heap of grain. So tell
me, where are these paths taking you, these shadows leading you, these
lies tempt- ing you? How is it you have been deceived, «how is it you
have been duped?»1 But «each term is written»2 and every absence is
followed by a return. 1.105.3 Listen to your godly leader, listen to him
with your hearts, and pay attention when he speaks! A scout must tell
his people the truth, gather them together, and remain alert.3 But this
one has indeed exposed the affair for you and split it open like a
cowrie shell,4 he has peeled it clear like gum from tree bark. The time
will come when evil ensconces itself in its cradle, igno- rance mounts
its steeds, tyranny grows strong, callers to truth dwindle, time attacks
like a rapacious carnivore, and evil's camel stallion, gagged for a
time, roars. People will become brothers in debauchery, deserters from
religion, best friends in their mutual lying, and fierce enemies in the
face of truth. When this happens, the son will bring his parents utter
despair, the rain will bring scorch- ing heat, the wicked will brim like
a flood, and the noble will be depleted like an exhausted wellspring.
The people of that time will be wolves, its rulers will be predators,
its commoners will be gluttons, and its poor will be dead. Truth will
collapse and falsehood spread, tongues will profess affection while
hearts will conceal malice, adultery will be the source of kinship while
chastity will be a thing of wonder, and Islam will be worn as a fur
turned inside out. 1.106 From an oration by ʿAlī:5 1.106.1 Everything
bows to him, and everything exists through him. He is the wealth of the
poor, the might of the humble, the strength of the weak, and the refuge
of the desperate. If someone speaks, he hears, if someone stays silent,
he knows their secret, while someone lives, he provides them sustenance,
and when someone dies, it is to him they return. God, eyes cannot see
you, so they 1 Qurʾan, Ghāfir 40:62. 2 Qurʾan, Raʿd 13:38. 3 The "scout"
refers to ʿAlī himself. 4 Or, a glass bead. 5 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (ʿIqd,
4:166--169) says this is ʿAlī's "Luminous Oration" (Zahrāʾ), which also
includes §1.91 and §1.158. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 272 Text and
Translation خلقك لم تخلق الخلق لوحشة ولا ٱستعملتهم لمنفعة ولا يسبقك من
طلبت ولا يفلتك من أخذت ولا ينقص سلطانك من عصاك ولا يزيد في ملكك من أطاعك
ولا يردّ أمرك من سخط قضاءك ولا يستغني عنك من تول ّ ى عن أمرك كلّ سرّ عندك
علانية وكلّ غيب عندك شهادة. أنت الأبد١ لا أمد لك وأنت المنتهى لا محيص عنك
وأنت الموعد لا منجا منك٢ بيدك ناصيةكلّ دابّة وإليك مصير كلّ نسمة. سبحانك ما
أعظم ما نرى من خلقك وما أصغر عظيمه في جنب قدرتك وما أهول ما نرى من
ملـكوتك وما أحقر ذلك فيما غاب عنّا من سلطانك وما أسبغ نعمك في الدنيا وما
أصغرها في نعم الآخرة. 1.106.2منها من ملائكة أسكنتهم سمواتك ورفعتهم عن
أرضك هم أعلم خلقك بك وأخوفهم لك وأقربهم منك لم يسكنوا الأصلاب ولم يضمّنوا
الأرحام ولم يخلقوا من ماء مهين ولم يشعّبهم ريب المنون وإنّهم على مكانهم
منك ومنزلتهم عندك وٱستجماع أهوائهم فيك وكثرة طاعتهم لك وقل ّ ة غفلتهم عن
أمرك لو عاينوا كنه ما خفي عليهم منك لحقّروا َ زَ لو مهلامعأ رَوا على أنفسهم
ولعرفوا أنّهم لم يعبدوك حقّ عبادتك ولم يطيعوك حقّ طاعتك. 1.106.3سبحانك
خالقًا ومعبودًا بحسن بلائك عند خلقك خلقت دارًا وجعلت فيها مأدُبة مشربًا
ومطعمًا وأزواجًا وخدمًا وقصورًا وأنهارًا وزروعًا وثمارًا. ثمّ أرسلت تقّوش ام ىلإ
الو اوبغر هيف تبّغر اميف الو اوباجأ يعادلا الف اهيلإ وعدي اً يعاد إليه
ٱشتاقوا أقبلوا على جيفة قد ٱفتضحوا بأكلها وٱصطلحوا على حبّها. ومن عشق
ةعيمس ريغ نذأب عمسيو ةحيحص ريغ نيعب رظني وهف هبلق ضرمأو هرصب ىشعأ اً ئيش
قد خرقت الشهوات عقله وأماتت الدنيا قلبه وولهت عليها نفسه فهو عبد لها
ولمن ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩الأمد⟨. ٢ن،ھ،م،ش:كذا.ي،ومصحّحةفيم،ش:أضيفت
⟩إلّاإليك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
273 cannot inform about you. Indeed, you existed before any of your
creatures who could describe you. You did not create them because you
felt lonely or because they would bring you benefit. Those you pursue
cannot outrun you, those you seize cannot escape.Those who disobey you
do not lessen your authority, those who obey you do not bolster your
kingdom, those who are unhappy with your
decreecannotdeflectyourcommand,andthosewhoturnawayfromyourcom- mand
still need you. For you, all secrets are open, all mysteries evident.
You are eternal without end, the terminus from where there is nowhere to
flee. Yours is the promised meeting from which there is no escape, your
hand holds the fore- lock of every four-footed beast, to you returns
every living being. Glory to you! How wondrous the marvels we see of
your creation, yet how small its great- ness alongside your power! How
grand what we see of your kingdom, yet how humble in comparison with
what is hidden from us of your might! How per- fect your blessings for
us in this world, yet how small against the blessings of the hereafter!
1.106.2 From the same oration: You created angels, whom you lodged in
your skies and raised above your earth. Of all your creatures, they know
you best, fear you most, and are closest to you.
Theywereneverhousedinsideloins,envelopedinwombs,createdfromalowly drop
of sperm, or dispersedbyfate'scalamity.Butdespitetheirstationnearyou and
their position by your side, despite the absorption of their desires in
you, the scale of their obedience for you, and their absence of
inattention to your command---if they were to plumb your hidden depths,
they would deem their deeds trivial and reprimand themselves. They would
know that they have not worshipped you as they ought or obeyed you as
you deserve. 1.106.3 Glory to you, revered creator whom we worship!
Bestowing a great favor on your creatures, you created a dwelling and
placed therein a banquet of food and drink, spouses, servants, palaces,
streams, grain, and fruit. Then you sent someone to invite people
in---but they did not answer the call, show interest in what you
encouraged them to do, or evince passion for what you enthused about.
Instead, they fell upon a rotten carcass, and, to their deep- est shame,
they devoured it and fell in love with it.1 Love blinds the eye and
makes the heart ill---the lover sees with blurry eyes and listens with
deaf ears, passions ravage his mind, and the world, his beloved, kills
his heart and con- 1 The house is paradise (see descriptions of paradise
in the Qurʾan, e.g., Baqarah 2:25, Āl ʿImrān 3:15, Furqān 25:10), the
caller is Muḥammad, and more generally, each prophet, and the car- cass
is this world (B 434; Ḥ7:206--207). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 274 Text
and Translation في يده شيء منها حيثما زالت زال إليها وحيثما أقبلت أقبل
عليها لا ينزجر من الله بزاجر
ولايتّعظمنهبواعظوهويرىالمأخوذينعلىالغِرّةحيثلاإقالةولارجعةكيفنزل بهم ما
كانوا يجهلون وجاءهم من فراق الدنيا ما كانوا يأمنون وقدموا من الآخرة على
ما كانوا يوعدون. فغير موصوف ما نزل بهم ٱجتمعت عليهم سكرة الموت وحسرة
الفوت ففترت لها أطرافهم وتغيّرت لها ألوانهم. ثمّٱزداد الموت فيهم ولوجًا
فحيل بين أحدهم وبين منطقه وإنّه لبين أهله ينظر ببصره ويسمع بأذنه على صحّة
من عقله وبقاء من لبّه يفكّر فِيم َأفنى عمره وفيم أذهب دهره ويتذّ كر أموالًا
جمعها أغمض في مطالبها وأخذها من مصرّحاتها ومشتبهاتها قد لزمته تبعات جمعها
وأشرف على فراقها تبقى لمن وراءه ينعمون فيها ويتمتّعون بها فيكون الم َ هْنأ
لغيره والعِب ْ ء على ظهره. والمرء قد غلقت رهونه بها فهو ي َ عَض ُ ّ يده
ندامة على ما أصحر له عند الموت من أمره ويزهد فيما كان يرغب فيه أيّام عمره
ويتمنّى أنّ الذي كان يغبطه بها ويحسده عليها قد حازها دونه. فلم يزل الموت
يبالغ في جسده حتّى خالط سمعه فصار بين أهله لا ينطق بلسانه ولا يسمع بسمعه
يردّد طرفه بالنظر في وجوههم يرى حركات ألسنتهم ولا يسمع١ رجع كلامهم.
ثمّٱزداد الموت ٱلتياطًا به فقبض بصرهكما قبض سمعه وخرجت الروح من جسده فصار
جيفة بين أهله قد أوحشوا من جانبه وتباعدوا من قربه لا ي ُ اً يكاب دعس َ خَم
ىلإ هولمحّمث .اً يعاد بيجي الو ط ّ في الأرض فأسلموه فيه إلى عمله وٱنقطعوا
عن زَورته. 1.106.4حتّى إذا بلغ الكتاب أجله والأمر مقاديره وألحق آخر الخلق
بأوّله وجاء من أمر الله ما يريده من تجديد خلقه أماد السماء وفطرها وأرجّ
الأرض وأرجفها وقلع جبالها ونسفها ودكّ بعضُها بعضًا من هيبة جلالته ومخوف
سطوته وأخرج من فيها
فجدّدهمبعدإخلاقهموجمعهمبعدتفريقهمثمميّزهملمايريدمنمُسائلتهمعنالأعمال
١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم،ونسخةفيش: ⟩يستطيع⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 275
sumeshissoul.Hethusbecomesaslavetotheworldandtoallwhopossessany- thing
of her, wherever she goes he follows, and wherever she turns he turns.
He pays no heed to God's warning and takes no counsel from God's
lessons. All the while, he sees the heedless abruptly taken from her to
a place from which there is no return, and he sees the terror they had
denied descend upon them. He sees them leave the world in which they had
taken comfort, and move to the afterlife as they had been warned. The
horror that descends upon the dying person is beyond words. As the
anguished convulsions of death and the remorseful pangs of loss together
bear down upon him, his extremities begin to lose feeling, and his color
changes. Then, death penetrates further and prevents him from speech. He
lies among his family, seeing them with his eyes, hearing them with his
ears, still able to discern, still able to understand. He can think only
about his wasted life and squandered time. He remembers the wealth he
has amassed, both licit and illicit, from honest and dubious sources.
The sins he has gathered now weigh him down, now, when he is about to
leave everything behind. The people who survive him will enjoy his
wealth. Its gratification will belong to another, while the burden will
weigh down his back. His debt has come due for payment. He bites on his
knuckles, regretting the misdeeds that are now clear to him, caring
little for the things he craved all the days of his life. He wishes that
the person who envied him his wealth and coveted his property had taken
it all! Mean- while, death continues to penetrate his body and it
pierces his hearing. Now he lies among his family, his tongue unable to
speak, his ears unable to hear. His eyes go from face to face, he sees
their tongues moving but cannot hear their words. Then death tightens
its grip. His sight is taken away, just as his hearing had been earlier,
and his soul leaves his body. He becomes a corpse lying amid his family,
and they recoil from him in fear and back away---he cannot console those
who weep or answer those who call out. Then they carry him to a grave
marked with lines in the earth. They give him over to his deeds and
cease to visit. 1.106.4 Until destiny reaches its term and the affair
approaches its ordained hour,whenthelastof
creationhascaughtupwiththefirstandGod'scommand arrives to renew his
creation, he shakes the sky and splits it, convulses the earth and
agitates it, plucks out each mountain and uproots it, and, terrified by
his majesty and cowed by his power, each crushes the other. He extracts
all who are on earth, renewing them after their decay, gathering them
after their sepa- ration. Then he stands them, each in his place, to be
interrogated about deeds and secret acts. He divides them into two
groups, blessing the one and punish- ing the other. He rewards the
obedient with nearness to his divine self and with al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 276 Text
and Translation وخبايا الأفعال وجعلهم فريقين أنعم على هؤلاء وٱنتقم من
أُولاء١ فأمّا أهل الطاعة فأثابهم بجواره وخل ّ مهبونت الو لاحلا مهب رّيغتي
الو لاّزُ ّنلا نعظي ال ثيح هراد يف مهد الأفزاع ولا تنالهم الأسقام ولا تعرض
لهم الأخطار ولا تشخصهم الأسفار وأمّا أهل المعصية فأنزلهم شرّ دار وغ َ
مهسبلأو مادقألاب يصاونلا نرقو قانعألا ىلإ يديألا َ ّل سرابيل القَطِران
ومقطّعات النيران في عذاب قد ٱشتدّ حرّه وباب قد أُطبق على أهله فينارلهاكَل َ
بولَج َ َ هَ لوب بساطعوقصيفهائللايظعنمقيمهاولايفادىأسيرها ولا تقصم٢ كُبولها
لا مدّة للدار فتفنى ولا أجل للقوم في ُ قضى. 1.106.5منها في ذ كر النبيّصل ّ
ى الله عليه وآله قد حقّر الدنيا وصغّرها وأهون بها وهوّنها وعلم أنّ الله
زواها عنه ٱختيارًا وبسطها لغيره ٱحتقارًا فأعرض عن الدنيا بقلبه وأمات ذ
كرها من نفسه وأحب ّ أن تغيب زينتها عن عينه لكيلا يتّخذ منها رياشًا أو يرجو
فيها مقامًا. بلّغ عن ربّه معذرًا ونصح لأمّته منذرًا ودعا إلى الجنّة مبشّرًا. نحن
شجرة النبوّة ومحط ّ الرسالة ومختل َ ف الملائكة ومعادن العلم وينابيع
الحكم. ناصرنا ومحبّنا ينتظر الرحمة وعدوّنا ومبغضنا ينتظر السطوة. 1.107ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام إنّ أفضل ما توسّل به المتوسّلون إلى الله سبحانه الإيمان
به وبرسوله والجهاد في سبيله فإنّهذروة الإسلام وكلمةالإخلاص فإنّها الفطرة
وإقامالصلاةفإنّها المل ّ ة وإيتاءالزكاة فإنّها فريضة واجبة وصوم شهر رمضان
فإنّه جنّة من العقاب وحجّ البيت وٱعتماره
١ش،ن،ھ،ونسخةفيي:كذا.م،ي،ونسخةفيھ:⟩هؤلاء⟨. ٢ش،ن:كذا.م،ي:⟩يفصم⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
277 eternal life in his abode, which its inhabitants never leave, where
their condi- tion never changes, misfortunes never befall, illness never
takes hold, dangers never approach, and journeys never displace. He
locks up the disobedient in the abode of horrors. He shackles their
hands to their necks, binds their fore- locks to their feet, clothes
them in garments of pitch, and dresses them in robes of fire. He throws
them into the chamber of torture, whose heat endlessly sears, whose door
remains bolted, and whose blaze rages with rabid hunger, clam- orous
tumult, sheets of flame, and terrifying thunder. Its resident never
leaves, its captive is never ransomed, its shackles are never broken.
This abode has no limit, so it never ceases to be. Its people have no
lifespan, so the terror never ends. 1.106.5 From the same oration in
praise of the Prophet: He viewed the world with contempt, demeaned it,
disparaged it, and deemed it lowly. He recognized that God had
deliberately turned the world away from him while allowing it
ungrudgingly to many, so he turned his heart away from it and drove all
thoughts of it from his mind. He preferred that its ornaments be absent
from his eyes, so he would not be tempted to don its splendid garments
or long for it to be his permanent residence. He conveyed his Lord's
message and proved his claim, instructed his community and gave them
warning, and called them to paradise with glad tidings of its bliss. We
are the tree of prophecy, the station of God's message, and the place
where angels alight. We are mines of knowledge and springs of wisdom.
Who- eversupportsandlovesusshouldexpectGod'smercy.Whoeverbearsusenmity
or malice should expect God's assault. 1.107 From an oration by ʿAlī:1
The deeds that bring you closest to God are the following: belief in him
and his messenger; jihad in his path, for it is Islam's summit; the
testament of sincerity---⟨There is no god but God⟩---for it is the
natural state; performing the ritual prayer, for it is the way of truth;
offering the alms levy, for it is a man- 1 Excerpt from one of ʿAlī's
famous sermons, named in several sources as "The Brocade (Dībāj)
Oration" that begins with the line, "Praise to God, creator of the
world" (الحمد لله فاطر الخلق ,) of which another part is §1.83.4
(Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 149--150). The first paragraph is attributed to the
Prophet Muḥammad in Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:96--97. "The testament of
sincerity" (kalimat al-ikhlāṣ) is ⟨There is no god but God⟩(Lā ilāha
illā Allāh), the central creed of Islam, which I have added in the
translation for clarity. The "natural state" ( fiṭrah) is to believe in
God, according to the prophetic hadith stating that each human child at
the time of birth is Mus- lim. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 278 Text and
Translation فإنّهما ينفيان الفقر ويرحضان الذنب وصلة الرحم فإنّها مَثْراة في
المال ومنساة في الأجل وصدقة السرّفإنّها تكفّر الخطيئة وصدقة العلانية فإنّها
تدفع ميتة السوء وصنائع المعروف فإنّها تقي مصارع الهوان. أفيضوا في ذ كر
الله فإنّه أحسن الذ كر وٱرغبوا فيما وعد المتّقين فإنّ وعده أصدق اومّ لعتو
ننسلا ىدهأ اهّنإف هتّنسب اوّنتسٱو يدهلا لضفأ هّنإف مّكيبن يدهب اودتقٱو دعولا
القرآن فإنّه ربيع القلوب وٱستشفوا بنوره فإنّه شفاء الصدور وأحسنوا تلاوته
فإنّه أنفع القصص.وإنّ
العالمالعاملبغيرعلمهكالجاهلالحائرالذيلايستفيقمنجهلهبلالحجّة عليه أعظم
والحسرة له ألزم وهو عند الله أَلْوَم. 1.108ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.108.1أمّا بعد. فإن ّ ي أحذّر كم الدنيا فإنّها حلوة خضرة حُفّت بالشهوات
وتحبّبت نمؤت الو اهتربَح مودت ال رورغلاب تنّ يزتو لامآلاب تّلحتو ليلقلاب
تقارو ةلجاعلاب فجعتها غرّارة ضرّارة حائلة زائلة نافدة بائدة أكّالة غوّالة لا
تعدو إذا تناهت إلى أمنيّة ِءاَم َ ّسلٱ َنِم ُهاَ نْلَزْنَأ ٍءآَ مَك﴿ هناحبس هللا
لاق امك نوكت نأ اهب ىضرلاو اهيف ةبغرلا لهأ ف َ َ لَ تْخٱ ط َ ب ِ هِ نَبَات ُ
ٱلأَرْضِ ف َ أَصْب َ حَ هَشِيما ًت َ ذْرُوهُ ٱلرِّياحُ وَ َ لَ عُ هّٰللٱ َناَك ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍ
َ تْق ُ ّم دِرا ً اً نطب اهئاّرس نم َقْلَ ي ملو ةربع اهدعب هتبقعأ اّلإ ةربح يف
اهنم ؤرمٱ نكي مل .﴾ َ ت ملو اً رهظ اهئاّرض نم هتحنم اّلإ يرحو ءالب ةنزم
هيلع تنته اّلإ ءاخر ةميد اهيف هَ ّ لُط ّ إذا أصبحت له منتصرة أن تمسي له
متنكّرة وإن جانب منها ٱعذوذب وٱحلولى أمرّ منها اهنم يسمي الو اً بعت اهبئاون
نم هتقهرأ اّلإ اً بَغَر اهتراضغ نم ؤرمٱ لاني ال ىبوأف بناج في جناح أمن إلّا
أصبح على قوادم خوف. غرّارة غرور ما فيها فانية فانٍ من عليها لا خير في شيء
من أزوادها إلّا التقوى من أقلّ منها ٱستكثر ممّا يؤمنه ومن ٱستكثر منها
ٱستكثر ممّا يوبقه وزال عمّا قليل عنهكم من واثق بها فجعته وذي طمأنينة إليها
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
279 dated obligation; fasting in the month of Ramadan, for it is a
shield from God's punishment; performing the hajj and the ʿumrah
pilgrimage to Mecca, for they dispel poverty and wash away sins;
fostering close ties with kin, for it increases wealth and prolongs
life; giving alms in secret, for it expiates transgressions; disbursing
alms in public, for it wards off horrible forms of death; and acts of
charity, for they protect you from dishonor and shame. Fill yourself
with God's remembrance for it is the best remembrance. Wish for
everything he promised the pious, for his promise is the truest of
promises. Follow the guidance of your Prophet, for it is the best
guidance. Follow his Sun- nah,foritisthemostrighteousof
practices.LearntheQurʾan,foritistheheart's springtime. Heal yourselves
by its light, for it is a cure for souls. And recite it beautifully, for
it is the most beneficial exhortation. A learned man who acts contrary
to his learning is as bad as the ignorant and perplexed man who never
wakesfromhisstupor.Infact,thecaseagainsthimisstronger,hisanguishmore
binding, and his culpability greater before God. 1.108 From an oration
by ʿAlī:1 1.108.1 I warn you against this world, for it is sweet and
lush and surrounded by temptations. It breeds love for the here and now
and excites wonder with its trifles, it is adorned with false hopes and
embellished with deceptions, its joy does not last and its trauma is
relentless. A ghoulish devourer, it deceives, harms, changes, ceases,
wanes, perishes, and consumes. At the very moment that it fulfills your
dearest hopes, it becomes---as God Most High has said--- «like water
that we sent down from the sky: the earth's vegetation drew from it,
then became dry straw, and was scattered by the winds. God has power
over all things.»2 The world never gives a man joy without following it
with tears, it never bestows happiness without following it with harm,
it never sprinkles soft ease without following it with a cloudburst of
calamity. If it braces him in the morning it rejects him in the evening,
if one of its aspects is sweet and sugary the other is bitter and
pestilential, if it bestows fresh boun- ties it oppresses later with
oppressive misfortunes; a man does not pass the night sheltered under
its wing without waking up under its pinion of fear. The world deceives
and all in it is deception. The world will perish and all upon it will
perish. There is no good in any of its provisions save piety. Those who
take little from the world gather stores of protection, while those who
amass its wares hoard that which will destroy, whose benefit will soon
cease. 1 On the pulpit in Basra, immediately after the Battle of the
Camel in 36/356. Kulaynī, Kāfī, 8:256. 2 Qurʾan, Kahf 18:45. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 280 Text and
Translation َ ه َ ّبُأ يذو هتعرص دق ة قد جعلته حقيرًا وذي نَخوة قد ردّته
ذليل ً ا سلطانها دُوَل وعيشها رَن ِ ق وعذبها أجاج وحلوها صَبِر وغذاؤها سِمام
وأسبابها رِمام حيّها بعَر َ ض موت وصحيحها بعرض سقم ملـكها مسلوب وعزيزها
مغلوب وموفورها منكوب وجارها محروب. 1.108.2ألستم في مساكن من كان قبلـكم
أطول أعمارًا وأبقى آثارًا وأبعد آمالًا وأعدّ عديدًا وأكثف جنودًا تعبّدوا للدنيا
أي يأ اهورثآو دّبعت َ ّ ّ إيثار ثمّ ظعنوا عنها بغير زاد مبلّغ ولا ظهر قاطع.
فهل بلغكم أنّ الدنيا سخت لهم نفسًا بفدية أو أعانتهم بمعونة أو أحسنت لهم
صحبة بل أرهقتهم بالفوادح وأوهنتهم بالقوارع وضعضعتهم بالنوائب وعفّرتهم
للمناخر ووطئتهم بالمناسم وأعانتعليهم ريب المنون. فقدرأيتم تنكّرهالمن دان
اّلإمهتّلحأوأبَغ َ ّسلااّلإمهتدّوزلهدبألاقارفلاهنعاونعظىّتحاهيلإدلخأواهرثآواهل
نوّنئمطت اهيلإ مأ نورثؤت هذهفأ ةمادنلا اّلإ مهتبقعأ وأ ةملظلا اّلإ مهل ترّون
وأ كْن َ ّضلا أم عليها تحرصون فبئست الدار لمن لم يتّهمها ولم يكن فيها على
وجل منها. 1.108.3نَمْاوُ لاَ ق﴿
نيذلاباهيفاوظعّتٱواهنعنونعاظواهوكراتمّكنأبنوملعتمتنأواوملعٱف ْ ُ ي الف
مهروبق ىلإ اولمُح﴾ًةَ ّوُ ق اَ ّنِم ُ ّدَشَأ دعَون ركبانًا وأُنزلوا فلا يدعون
ضِيفانًا وجعل نوبيجي ال ةريِج مهف ناريج تافُ ّرلا نمو نافكأ بارتلا نمو نانجأ
حيفصلا نم مهل اوطنقي مل اوطحُق نإو اوحرفي مل اوديج نإ ةبَدْنَم نولابي الو
اًميَض نوعنمي الو اً يعاد ءاملح نوبراقتي ال نوبيرقو نوروازتي ال نوُ نادتم
داعبأ مهو ةريجو داحآ مهو عيمج قد ذهبت أضغانهم وجهلاء قد ماتت أحقادهم لا
يخشى فَج ْ عهم ولا يرجى دفعهم al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
281 The world strikes those who trust it and fells those who place in it
their faith. How many grandees has it humbled! How many arrogant men has
it debased! Its power goes around in turns, its life is turbid, its
water is brackish, its sweets are filled with bitter juice, its
nourishment is poison, its ropes are decayed, its living are targets for
death, its healthy are targets for illness, its kingdom will be
pillaged, its mighty will be vanquished, its wealthy will be afflicted,
and its neighbors will be plundered. 1.108.2 Do you not dwell in the
abodes of those who came before you and enjoyed longer lives, who left
behind more lasting monuments, had lengthier aspirations, were more
profuse in number, and led vaster armies? They wor- shipped the world
abjectly, they gave it preference, fully and truly, but they left it
without sufficient provisions for the journey, or even a mount to carry
them on its back. Have you ever heard that the world in its generosity
let a single soul escape in lieu of ransom, or that it gave them any
form of help, or offered to accompany them? No. It crushed them with
catastrophes, weakened them with calamities, shook them with
misfortunes, ground their noses in the dust, trampled them under its
hooves, and equipped fate to bring them down. You have seen how it
rejected those who bowed before it, gave it preference, and offered it
loyalty. Their departure is an eternal separation. Did the world sup-
ply them with anything other than thirst, house them in anything other
than narrow graves, give them anything other than dark gloom, or requite
them with anything other than regret? Is this the same world that you
too favor above all else, put your faith in, covet?What a wretched abode
for those who do not view it with suspicion, who are not on their guard!
1.108.3 Know this---and you do---that you too will leave the world, you
too will depart. Take lessons from the fate of those who «said: is
anyone might- ier than we are?»1 They have been carried to their graves
but cannot be called wayfarers, they have been laid there to rest but
cannot be called guests, they have been covered in dirt and shrouded by
earth. Decaying bones are their neighbors---neighbors who cannot answer
those who call out to them, offer protection from attackers, or care
about their mourners' wails. If they get rain they do not rejoice, if
they encounter drought they do not despair. They are together yet each
is alone, neighbors yet so far distant from one another, so close yet
they do not visit, so near yet they cannot meet, senior commanders whose
hostilities are a thing of the past, rash youths whose hate and rancor 1
Qurʾan, Fuṣṣilat 41:15. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 282 Text and
Translation امك اهوءاجف ةملظ رونلابو ةبرغ لهألابو اًقيض ةعسلابو اً نطب
ضرألا رهظب اولدبتسٱ
فارقوهاحفاةعراةقدظعنواعنهابأعمالهمإلىالحياةالدائمةوالدارالباقيةكماقالسبحانه
َ ب اَ مَك﴿ .﴾َنيِ لِعاَ ف اَ ّ نُك اَ ّن ِإ آَ نْيَ لَ عً ادْعَوُهُديِعُ ّن ٍقْلَخ َل َ ّوَأ
آَنْأَد 1.109ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ذ كر فيها ملك الموت وتوفّيه الأنفس هل
تحس ّ به إذا دخل منزلًا أم هل تراه إذا توف ّ ى أحدًا بل كيف يتوف ّ ى
الجنين في بطن أمّه أيلج عليه من بعض جوارحها أم الروح أجابته بإذن ربّها أم
هو ساكن معه في أحشائها. كيف يصف إلٰه َ ه من يعجز عن صفة مخلوق مثله.
1.110ومن خطبة له عليه السلام وأحذّر اهتنيزب تّرغو اهرورغب تّنيزت دق ةعجُن
رادب تسيلو ةعلُ ق لزنم اهّنإف ايندلا مك دار هانت على ربّها فخلط حلالها
بحرامها وخيرها بشرّها وحياتها بموتها وحلوها بمرّها. لم ي ُ صَفِّها الله
لأوليائه ولم يضنّ بها على أعدائه خيرها زهيد وشرّها عتيد وجمعها ينفد
وملـكها يسلب وعامرها يخرب فما خير دار تنقض نقض البناء وعمر يفنى فناء
الزاد ومدّة تنقطع ٱنقطاع السير. ٱجعلوا ما ٱفترض الله عليكم من طلبتكم
وٱسألوه من أداء حقّه ما سألـكم وأسمعوا دعوة الموت آذانكم قبل أن يدعى بكم.
إنّ الزاهدين في الدنيا
تبكيقلوبهموإنضحكواويشتدّحزنهموإنفرحواويكثرمقتهمأنفسهموإنٱغتبطوابما
رزقواقدغابعنقلوبكمذ كرالآجالوحضرتكمكواذبالآمالفصارتالدنياأملك بكم من
الآخرة والعاجلة أذهب بكم من الآجلة. وإنّما أنتم إخوان على دين الله ما فرّق
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
283 have been swept away, their blows no longer feared, their protection
no longer sought. They surrendered the back of the earth for its belly,
a vast space for narrow straits, family for exile, and light for
darkness. They left the world as they had come, barefoot and naked,
departing with their deeds to eternal life and the everlasting abode.
For, as God says, «as I brought the first creation into being, so I
shall bring it forth anew---this is my pledge, and I shall bring it to
pass.»1 1.109 From an oration by ʿAlī in which he spoke of the Angel of
Death and the manner in which he takes souls:2 Do you sense his presence
when he enters a home, or see him when he takes someone away? In fact,
do you know how he takes the life of a fetus from inside its mother's
womb? Does he enter through one of her limbs, or does its spirit answer
the angel with God's permission, or is he residing with it already
inside the mother? How can we who are incapable of describing a creature
like us aspire to describe our creator? 1.110 From an oration by ʿAlī: I
warn you of this world: it is a home from which you will be uprooted,
not an abode where you own the right to pasture, a dwelling adorned in
deception, deceiving with its adornments. It is worth nothing in the
eyes of its Lord, which is why he has intertwined the lawful in it with
the unlawful, the good with the bad, life with death, and sweet with
bitter. God has not made the world pure for his friends to enjoy, nor
begrudged it to his enemies, for its good is meager, its evil ever
present, its goods are temporary, its realm awaits pillage, and its
habi- tations anticipate ruin. What good is a house that will crumble as
a timeworn edifice, a life that will be exhausted like provisions, and a
timespan that will be completed like a journey? When you supplicate God,
include a prayer for his help in undertaking his mandates and ask him to
aid you in giving him his due. Bend your ears to death's summons before
your name is called. True renun- ciants live thus: their hearts weep
even when they laugh, their grief is intense even when they are joyful,
and their self-condemnation is great even though they are delighted with
what they have been given. But your hearts have lost awareness of your
imminent end and are filled with false hopes; the world con- trols you
to the detriment of the hereafter; the here-and-now has distanced you
fromtheafterlife.YouarebrethreninGod'sreligion,butfoulintentionsandevil
1 Qurʾan, Anbiyāʾ 21:104. 2 Excerpt from a long oration on God's unity
(tawḥīd). B 448. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 284 Text and
Translation بينكم إلّا خبث السرائر وسوء الضمائر فلا توازرون ولا تناصحون
ولا تباذلون ولا توادّون ما لـكم١ تفرحون باليسير من الدنيا تدركونه ولا
يحزنكم الـكثير من الآخرة تُحر َ مونه ويقلقكم اليسير من الدنيا يفوتكم حتّى
يتبي ّ ن ذلك في وجوهكم وقل ّ ة صبر كم عمّا زوي منها عنكم كأنّها دار مقامكم
وكأنّ متاعها باقٍ عليكم. وما يمنع أحد كم أن يستقبل
أخاهبمايخافمنعيبهإلّامخافةأنيستقبلهبمثلهقدتصافيتمعلىرفضالآجلوحب ّ
العاجلوصاردينأحد .هدّيسىضرزرحأوهلمعنمغرفدقنمعينصهناسلىلعةَقْعُ لمك 1.111ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام 1.111.1الحمد لله الواصل الحمد بالنعم والنعم بالشكر.
نحمده على آلائهكما نحمده على بلائه. ونستعينه على هذه النفوس البِطاء عمّا
أمرت به السراع إلى ما نهيت عنه. ونستغفره ممّا أحاط به علمه وأحصاهكتابه
علم غير قاصر وكتاب غير مغادر. ونؤمن به إيمان من عاين الغيوب ووقف على
الموعود إيمانًا نفى إخلاصه الشرك ويقينه الشكّ . ونشهد أن لا إل ٰ ه إلّا
الله وحده لا شريك له وأنّ محمّدًا عبده ورسوله شهادتين تصعدان القول وترفعان
العمل لا يخف ّ ميزان توضعان فيه ولا يثقل ميزان ترفعان عنه. 1.111.2أوصيكم
عباد الله بتقوى الله التي هي الزاد وبها المعاد زاد مبلّغ ومعاد منجح دعا
إليها أسمعُ داعٍ ووعاها خير واعٍ فأسمع داعيها وفاز واعيها. عباد الله إنّ
تقوى الله
حمتأولياءاللهمحارمهوألزمتقلوبهممخافتهحتّىأسهرتلياليهموأظمأتهواجرهم
١ش،ن،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩مابالـكم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
285 purposes have divided you---you have stopped supporting one another,
coun-
selingoneanother,givingtooneanother,orbearingoneanotheraffection.Why are
you so overjoyed when you win the world's baubles, yet not grieved when
deprived of the hereafter's bounty? How are you so exasperated by the
loss of these trifles that your anger, your frustration, is plain on
your face? You act as
thoughyouwillalwayslivehere,asthoughthiswealthwillalwaysremainyours! The
only thing that stops you from confronting your brother or disclosing
his failings is your fear that he will do the same. You have both
rejected the after- life and devoted yourselves to the present. Religion
to you has become a dollop for your tongue to lick up, as though you had
already completed your work and satisfied your master. 1.111 From an
oration by ʿAlī:1 1.111.1 Praise God who has linked praise with favors
and favors with thanks. We praise him for his blessings, as we praise
him for his trials. We ask him to rally our hearts, which are slow to
undertake his command and quick to rush into what he has forbidden.We
ask his forgiveness for everything we have done that his knowledge
encompasses and his inventory includes---that knowledge never falls
short, and that inventory never omits. We believe in him, as though we
have already seen the deep mysteries and attained the promised reward---
our sincerity refuses to assign partners to him, and our certainty
rejects all doubt. We bear witness that there is no god but God, he has
no partner, and Muḥammad is his servant and messenger, a testimony that
assures our prayers' and our deeds' ascent to God---no scale on which it
is placed is light, no scale from which it is absent has weight. 1.111.2
Servants of God, I counsel you to be conscious of him, to be pious.
Piety is the best provision for the journey and the best means of
return, for it is the provision that will get you to your destination
and the return it promises is assured. A perfect caller has called
toward it and a perfect listener has taken it to heart---that caller was
effective, and that listener will win entry to paradise. Servants of
God, his consciousness has protected his chosen ones from trans- 1 Ṭūsī
(Amālī, 443) prefaces §1.111.2 by saying, "The Commander of the Faithful
would say," indi- cating that the theme and words were frequent in
ʿAlī's oration; Naḥḥās (ʿUmdah, 1:353) cites it in an oration attributed
to Zayd ibn ʿAlī. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 286 Text and
Translation فأخذوا الراحة بالنصب والرِّي ّ بالظمأ وٱستقربوا الأجل فبادروا
العمل و كذّبوا الأمل هسوق رِ توُم رهدلا ّنأ ءانفلا نمف ربعو رَ يِغو ءانعو
ءانف راد ايندلا ّنإّمث .لجألا اوظحالف لاتخطئسهامهولاتوسىجراحهيرميالحيّ
بالموتوالصحيحبالسقموالناجيبالعطب آكللايشبعوشاربلاينقعومنالعناءأنّ
المرءيجمعمالايأكلويبنيمالايسكنثمّ
يخرجإلىاللهلامالًاحملولابناءنقلومنغيرهاأنّكترىالمرحوممغبوطًاوالمغبوط
مرحومًاليسذلكإلّانعيمًازلّ وبؤسًانزلومنعبرهاأنّ المرءيشرفعلىأملهفيقطعه حضور
أجله فلا أمل ي ُ درَك ولا مؤمّل يترك. فسبحان الله ما أغرّ سرورها وأظمأ ريّها
هب هقاحلل تّيملا نم ّيحلا برقأ ام هللا ناحبسف .ّدتري ٍضام الو ّدريٍءاج ال
اهَئْيَ ف ىحضأو وأبعد الميّت من الحيّ لٱنقطاعه عنه.
1.111.3إنّهليسشيءبشرّمنالشرّإلّاعقابهوليسشيءبخـيرمنالخـيرإلّاثوابه.وكلّ شيء من
الدنيا سماعه أعظم من عيانه وكلّ شيء من الآخرة عيانه أعظم من سماعه فليكفكم
من العيان السماع ومن الغيب الخـبر. وٱعلموا أنّ ما نقص من الدنيا وزاد في
الآخرة خير ممّا نقص من الآخرة وزاد في الدنيا فكم من منقوص رابح ومزيد خاسر
إنّ الذي أمرتم به أوسع من الذي نهيتم عنه وما أحلّ لـكم أكثر ممّا حرّم عليكم
فذَروا ما قلّ لماكثروماضاقلماٱت ّ سع.قدت ُ
كُفِّللـكمبالرزقوأمرتمبالعملفلايكوننّ المضمون لـكم طلبه أولى بكم من المفروض
عليكم عمله مع أنّه والله لقد ٱعترض الشكّ ودُخِل اليقين حتّى كأنّ الذي ضمن لـكم
قد فرض عليكم وكأنّ الذي فرض عليكم قد وضع عنكم. فبادروا العمل وخافوا بغتة
الأجل فإنّه لا يرجى من رجعة العمر ما يرجى من al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 287 gressing, and infused their hearts with fear, it has
made their nights wakeful and filled their days with thirst, so that
they find comfort in toil and satiety in thirst. Aware of approaching
death, they hasten to do good. Denying false hopes, they keep death in
front of their eyes. Next, know that the world is a place of perishing,
weariness, vicissitudes, and instruction. Perishing is this: fate stands
stretchinghis bow,his arrowsdo not miss,their woundsdo not heal; he
strikes the living with death, the healthy with illness, and the one who
flees with destruction; an eater whose appetite is never satiated, a
drinker whose thirst is never quenched. Weariness is this: a man gathers
food he will not eat and builds edifices he will not inhabit; he leaves
the world and returns to God with no property to carry, no edifice to
transport. Vicissitudes are these: you see the pitied become the object
of envy, and the envied become the object of pity, simply because of a
blessing that has disappeared or a misfortune that has arrived. Lessons
are these: a man is about to see his aspirations fulfilled when they are
severed by the ending of his life; no aspiration is attained, no aspirer
is left alive. Praise God! How deceptive are the world's pleasures! How
parching its drink! How scorching its shade! No one who arrives is
turned back, while no one who leaves can return. Praise God! How close
are the living to the dead, for they will soon be with them, but how far
the dead from the living, for they have been cut off from them forever!
1.111.3 There is nothing worse than evil except its punishment, and
nothing better than good except its reward. Everything in the world that
you hear about is greater than what you see, while everything in the
hereafter that you will see is greater than what you hear. Hearing
should suffice you, there is no need to see. Reports should suffice you,
even without direct witness. Know that a thing that decreases your share
of the world but increases your share of the hereafter is better than a
thing that decreases your share of the hereafter while increas- ing your
share of the world. Many a person with a decreased share of the world
earns good profit, while many a person with an increased share of the
world loses everything. What you are commanded to do is more capacious
than what you are prohibited from, and the things that are lawful for
you are more numer- ous than the things that are unlawful, so abandon
the little for the large, the narrow for the wide. God has guaranteed
your sustenance and commanded you to do good, so let not the thing that
is guaranteed deserve more effort from you than what is mandated upon
you. But, by God, doubt has appeared in your midst, your conviction has
become tainted; you act as though seeking the sus- tenance guaranteed
for you is a mandatory act of worship, while the worship that is
actually mandated is no longer required! Hasten to do good and fear the
sudden arrival of death.There is no hope for return of life, while there
is always al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 288 Text and
Translation َجْرُ
يملرمعلانمسمأتافاموهتدايزاًدغيجُرقزرلانممويلاتافامقزرلاةعجر ُ ت َ ّقَحَ
هّٰللااوُقَ ّتاـ﴿ـفيضاملاعمسأيلاويئاجلاعمءاجرلاهتعجرمويلا قَات ِ ُ توُ مَ تاَلَوِه
ا َ ّل ِإ َ ّن ُ مِلْس ُ ّم مُتنَأَو ونَ﴾. 1.112ومن خطبة له عيله السلام في
الاستسقاء اللّٰهمّ قد ٱنصاحت جبالنا وٱغبرّت أرضنا وهامت دوابّنا وتحـيّرت في
مرابضها وعجّت محرٱف
ّمهّٰللا١.اهدراومىلإنينحلاواهعتارميفدّدرتلاتّلمواهدالوأىلعىلاكَ ّثلاجيجع
حيرتها في مذاهبها وأنينها في موالجها. اللّٰهمّ خرجنا إليك حين ٱعتكرت علينا
حدابير نيح كوعدن سمتلملل غالبلاو سئتبملل ءاجرلا تنكف دْوَ جلا لياخم
انتفلخأو نينسلا قنط الأنام ومنع الغمام وهلك السوام أن لا تؤاخذنا
بأعمالنا ولا تأخذنا بذنوبنا وٱنشر ً لباو اً ّحس قنوملا تابنلاو قدغملا
عيبرلاو قعبنملا باحسلاب كتمحر انيلع ا تحيي به ما قد رابم ةبّيط ةّماع ةّمات
ةيورم ةييحم كنم اَ يْقُس ّمهّٰللا .تاف دق ام هب ّدرتو تام كة هنيئة اهب ييحتو
كدابع نم فيعضلا اهب شعنت ٣اهقرو اًرضان اهعرف اًرماث اهُتبن اً يكاز ٢ةعيرم ن
اهب بشعُ ت كنم اَ يْقُس ّمهّٰللا .كدالب نم تّيملا ِ جادُنا وتَجري بها وِهادنا
ويخصب بها
جنابناوتزكو٤بهاثمارناوتعيشبهامواشيناوتندىبهاأقاصيناوتستعينبهاضواحينامن ُ
ملا كشحوو ةلِمرُ ملا كّتيربىلع ةليزجلا كاياطعو ةعساولاكتاكرب همَلة. وأنزل
علينا سماء مُخضَل ّ ة مِدْرارًا هاطلة يدافع الوَدْق اهقرب بَ ّلُخ ريغ رطقلا اهنم
رطقلا زفحيو قدولا اهنم ُ ولا جَهام عارضها ولا ق َ ز َ ع رَبابها ولا شَفّان
ذِهابها حتّى يخصب لإمراعها المجدبون ويحيى ببركتها الم ُ سنِتون فإنّك تنزل
الغيث من بعد ما قنطوا وتنشر رحمتك وأنت الوليّ الحميد.
١ن،م،ش:كذا.ي،ھ،وفيهامشم،ش:أضيفت ⟩اللّٰهمّفٱرحمأنينالآنّةوحنينالحانّة⟨. ٢م، ن،
ش، ھ: كذا. ي: أضيفت قبلها ⟩مريئة⟨. نسخة في ش، ھ: ⟩مريئة⟨. ٣م، ن، ش،
ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ي، وأصل ھ: أضيفت ⟩غامرًا أرزاقها⟨. ٤ش، ھ، وأضيفت في ن:
كذا.م،ي،ونسخةفيش،ھ: ⟩وت ُ قبِل⟨.أصلن: ⟩تعشببهامواشينا⟨حيثسقطت ⟩نجادنا
...وتعيشبها⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
289 hope for return of sustenance; what is lost today of your sustenance
may come back increased tomorrow, but what was lost yesterday of your
time will never, ever return. Hope lies in the future, despair inhabits
the past, so «be conscious of God as you should, and make sure you die
submitting to him.»1 1.112 From an oration by ʿAlī beseeching God for
rain: God, our mountains are parched, and our plains have filled with
dust. Our sheep have gone mad with thirst and stand dazed in their
pens.2 They moan like bereaved mothers, too exhausted to look for
pasture or search out water- holes. God, have mercy on their panic when
they head out, and their sad cries when they return! God, we have come
to you in this open space because lean years of drought, like emaciated
camels, have hemmed us in, and clouds that promised rain approached but
turned away. You alone are the sufferer's hope and the petitioner's
provider. We call out to you in this time when people have lost heart,
when rainclouds have withheld their bounty, and grazing animals have
perished. Do not hold us hostage to our deeds or punish us for our sins.
Unfold your mercy for us with torrential clouds, abundant herbage, and
won- drous vegetation. Send us rain in a heavy downpour that revives
what had died and restores what was lost. God, we beseech you for water
that is reviving, quenching, perfect, universal, fragrant, blessed,
wholesome, and fertile. Let it bring forth plants that flourish, trees
full of fruit, and leaves fresh and green. Let it revive your weak
servants and renew your barren lands. God, we beseech you for water that
makes our highlands verdant, our lowlands lush, our coun- tryside
fertile, our fruits grow, and our sheep thrive. Let it irrigate our
farthest lands and soak our nearby areas. Shower your vast grace and
rich blessings on
us,yourdestitutehumancreatures,andyourforsakenbeasts.Sendusasoaking,
gushing, drenching sky in which one deluge drives away another and
raindrops jostle for space---a sky whose lightning does not deceive,
whose clouds do not disappoint, whose puffs do not dissipate, and whose
drizzle does not usher in cold, barren winds. Let its fertility irrigate
the lands struck by famine, let its felicity revive the people hit by
drought. You are the one who sends rain after all hope is gone, you are
the one who pours down your mercy, you are the pro- tector, the one
worthy of all praise!3 1 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:102. 2 Ar. dawābbunā, lit.
livestock, or pack animals. The use of the term marābiḍ, which are pens
for sheep, rather than mawāṭin, which are pens for camels (Ḥ7:264),
appears to specify sheep. 3 The last two lines are modified from Qurʾan,
Shūrā 42:28. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 290 Text and
Translation تفسير ما في هذه الخطبة من الغريب قوله عليه السلام ⟩ٱنصاحت
جبالنا⟨أي تشقّقت من المحول. يقال ⟩ٱنصاح الثوب⟨إذا ٱنشقّ ويقال أيضًا ⟩ٱنصاح
النبت⟨وصاح وصوّح إذ جف ّ رابْدِحعمج⟨نينسلاريبادح⟩هلوقو.شطعلامايُ
هلاوتشطعيأ⟨انّباودتماه⟩هلوقو.سبيو وهي الناقة التي أنضاها السير فشبّه بها
السنة التي فشا فيها الجدب. قال ذو الرمّة١ ـيِ باَدَح ـر ُمَـ ـا تَنْفَـ ـَخانُم ا
َ ّل ِإ ُ ّكـ ـةً َ لَ ع ى الْخ َ سْف َ لَ ب اَ هِب يِمْرَ ن ْوَأ ِ دًا ق َ اَ رْف
وقوله ⟩ولا قزع ربابها⟨القزع القِطَع الصغار المتفرّقة من السحاب. وقوله ⟩ولا
شفّان ذهابها⟨ فذحف ةنّيللا راطمألا باهِّذلاو ةدرابلا حيرلا ناّف َ ّشلاو
.⟨اهباهذ ناّفش تاذ الو⟩ هريدقت ّنإف ذات لعلم السامع به. 1.113ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام 1.113.1رّصقمالو ٍناوريغهّبرتالاسرغّلبفقلخلاىلعاًدهاشو ّقحلاىلإاً
يعادهلسرأ وجاهد في الله أعداءه غير واهن ولا معذّر إمام من ٱتّقى وبصر من
ٱهتدى. 1.113.2ولو تعلمون ما أعلم ممّا طُوي عنكم غيبه إذًا لخرجتم إلى الص
نوكبت تادُع ُ ّ على أعمالـكم وتلتدمون على أنفسكم ولتركتم أموالـكم لا حارس
لها ولا خالف عليها ولهمّت كلّ ٱمرئ منكم نفسه لا يلتفت إلى غيرها ولـكنّكم
نسيتم ما ذُ كّرتم وأمنتم ما رمأ مكيلع تّتشتو مكيأر مكنعَهاَ تَ ف مترّذُح كم.
لوددت أنّ الله فرّق بيني وبينكم وألحقني بمن هو أحقّ بي منكم قوم والله
ميامين الرأي مراجيح الحلم مَقاويل بالحقّ مَتاريكُ للبغي مضوا ق ُ دُمًا على
الطريقة وأوجفوا على المحجّة فظفروا بالعقبى الدائمة والـكرامة
١البحر:الطويل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
291 Raḍī: An explanation of the rare wordsin the oration:ʿAlī's
saying"our mountain mead- ows are parched (inṣāḥat)" means they have
cracked from the effects of the drought; the Arabs use the same verb for
a garment if it is torn, and a plant if it dries up and withers. ʿAlī's
saying "our sheep have gone mad with thirst (hāmat)" means they are
thirsty; huyām means thirst. ʿAlī's saying "emaciated camels of drought
(ḥadābīr)" uses the plural of ḥidbār, a female camel made gaunt by hard
travel, to which he compared a drought-stricken year. Dhū al-Rummah
said: Emaciated camels (ḥadābīr) fodderless in the night when they kneel
down to rest, or ridden hard into the desert wastes. In the phrase
"whose puffs (qazaʿ) do not dissipate," qazaʿ are small and scattered
wisps of
cloud.Thephrase"whosedrizzledoesnotusherinbarren,coldwinds(shaffānindhi-
hābuhā)" actually means "whose drizzle is not a bearer of cold, barren
winds"; shaffān is a cold, barren wind, and dhihāb are light showers of
rain; the word "bearer (dhāt)" is elided because the hearer would know
it is implied. 1.113 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.113.1 God sent Muḥammad
to call toward truth and bear witness to people. He conveyed his Lord's
messages, untiring and unstinting. He battled God's enemies, unflagging
and unfaltering. He is the leader of the pious and the eyes of the
righteous. 1.113.2 If you knew what I know of the mysteries hidden from
you, you would run out into the wilderness, weeping over your deeds, and
striking your breasts, leaving your property without guard or protector.
Every man would be ab-
sorbedinhisownapprehensionsandnotspareasinglethoughtforanyoneelse. But
no! You have forgotten what you were told and become complacent about
whatyouwerewarned.Youhavegoneastrayandfallenintototalchaos.O,howI wish
that God would deliver me from you and unite me with those who deserve
my companionship! They, by God, were people of felicitous vision, grave
matu-
rity,andtruthfulspeech,peoplewhoshunnedtreachery,advancedonthepath, and
raced on the road, who won everlasting life and gracious bounty. By God,
1 Excerpt from a Kufa oration in which ʿAlī attempted to muster his
supporters against the Syr- ians (B 456). Azharī (Tahdhīb,
s.v. "Kh-Ḍ-R") says it was delivered during ʿAlī's final days, thus in
40/661. Ṭūsī (Miṣbāḥ, 380--381) describes it as a Friday sermon.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 292 Text and
Translation الباردة. أما والله ليسلّطنّ عليكم غلام ثقيف الذيّال الميّال يأكل
خضرتكم ويذيب شَحمتكم. إيهٍأبا وَذَحة. عضوم اذه سيل ثيدح ةحذولا عم هلو جاّجحلا
ىلإ هب ئموي لوقلا اذهو .ءاسفنُ خلا⟨ةحذولا⟩و ذ كره. 1.114ومن كلام له عليه
السلام فلا أموالَ بذلتموها للذي رَزقها ولا أنفُس َ خاطَرتُم بها للذي خلقها ت
َ كر ُ مون بالله على عباده ولا ت ُ كرِمون الله َفي عباده فٱعتبروا
بنزولـكم منازل من كان قبلـكم وٱنقطاعكم عن أصل إخوانكم. 1.115ومن كلام له
عليه السلام َ نُ ـجلاو نيدلا يف ناوخإلاو ّقحلا ىلع راصنألا متنأ ن يوم
البأس والبِطانة دون الناس بكم أضرب المدبر وأرجو طاعة المقبل فأعينوني
بمناصحة جليّة١ من الغِش ّ سليمة من الريب فوالله إن ّ ي لأولى الناس بالناس.
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ: ⟩خليّة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 293 a swaggering, despotic youth from Thaqīf will take
control over you. He will devour your green grass and melt down your
fat-tail. Come on, then, you piece of dung on a sheep's butt!1 Raḍī:The
phrase "you piece of dung on a sheep's butt" refers to the black beetle,
and by this ʿAlī means Ḥajjāj: there is a long story about him and a
beetle, but; this is not the place to tell it.2 1.114 From an address by
ʿAlī: You don't spend your wealth for the one who has provided it or
risk your lives as you should for the one who has created you. You claim
honor in God's name from his servants, yet you don't honor God in your
treatment of his servants. Be warned! You reside in the homes of those
who went before you. Your rope is severed from them, the source that
connected you with your brethren. 1.115 From an address by ʿAlī:3 You
are my supporters in the cause of truth and my brothers in faith, my
shields onthedayof
combatandmyclosestassociates.Throughyou,Istrikethosewho
turnaway,andhopefortheobedienceof thosewhocomeforward.Givemesin- cere
counsel, then, which is pure of deceit, and free of doubt, for, by God,
I am the worthiest of the people to lead them. 1 Or: "... you
beetle-man!" (abā wadhaḥah), lit. "O father of---(meaning one who has
some close association with)---a wadhaḥah." The dictionary meaning of
wadhaḥah is "a piece of dry dung and urine sticking to the wool of a
sheep's butt" (Ibn Manẓūr, Lisān al-ʿArab, s.v. "W- Dh-Ḥ"). Raḍī says
wadhaḥah denotes khunfusāʾ (black- or dung-beetle), a denotation, as Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd mentions, not found in the lexicons. Baḥrānī says the term
"piece of dung" here indicates the "dung beetle," due to their
similarity in shape and size. These two commenta- tors and Rāwandī agree
that the prophecy is about the Umayyad governor of Iraq, Ḥajjāj ibn
Yūsuf al-Thaqafī (d. 95/714), explaining the characterization through
Ḥajjāj's phobia of black beetles,or,apparently,hisuseof
thoseinsectstoscratchhisbutt(!)(Ḥ7:279--281;R2:22;B457-- 458).
Mughniyyah (Gh 2:203) says the attribution is due to Ḥajjāj's swarthy
coloring, and his small physical and moral stature. 2 For the story, see
the previous note. 3 Excerpt from an address by ʿAlī to supporters
immediately after the Battle of the Camel, pre- sumably in Basra or
Kufa, in 36/656 (Ḥ7:284, after Madāʾinī andWāqidī).Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 5:79)
places the oration in 37/658 after the arbitration, with ʿAlī urging his
followers to regroup to fight Muʿāwiyah, but the relatively hopeful tone
fits better with ʿAlī's other orations in the former context. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 294 Text and
Translation 1.116ام لاقف اً ّيلم اوتكسف داهجلا ىلع مهّضحو سانلا عمج دقو
مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو بالـكم أمُخر َ سون أنتم فقال قوم منهم يا أمير
المؤمنين إن سرت سرنا معك فقال عليه السلام ما لـكم لا سُدّدتم لرشد ولا
هديتم لقصد أفي مثل هذا ينبغي لي أن أخرج إنّما يخرج في
مثلهذارجلممّنأرضاهمنشجعائكموذويبأسكمولاينبغيليأنأدعالجندوالمصر وبيت المال
وجباية الأرض والقضاء بين المسلمين والنظر في حقوق المطالبين ثمّأخرج في
كتيبة أتبع أخرى أتقلقل تقلقل القدح في الجفير الفارغ وإنّما أنا قطب الرحى
تدور عليّوأنابمكانيفإذافارقتهٱستحارمدارهاوٱضطربث ِ
فالها.هذالعمراللهالرأيالسوء. تصخشّمث يباكر تبّرقل هؤاقل يل َ ّمُح دق ول
ّودعلا ءاقل دنع ةداهشلا يئاجر الول هللاو عنكم فلا أطلبكم ما ٱختلفت جَنوب
وشَمال. 1.117ومن كلام له عليه السلام
باوبأتيبلالهأاندنعوتاملكلامامتوتادِعلامامتإوتالاسرلاغيلبتتمّ لُ عدقلهللات
الحكم وضياء الأمر ألا وإنّ شرائع الدين واحدة وسبله قاصدة من أخذ بها لَحِقَ
وغَنِم ومن وقف عنها ضلّ ون َ دِم. اعملوا ليوم ت ُ ذخر له الذخائر وتبلى فيه
السرائر ومن لا ينفعه al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
295 1.116 From an address by ʿAlī. ʿAlī instructed the people to
assemble and urged them to fight, and they all fell silent. "What is
wrong with you? Have you been struck dumb?" he exclaimed angrily. Some
people answered, "Commander of the Faithful, if you march, we will march
with you," whereupon ʿAlī thundered:1
Whatiswrongwithyou?Whatyouproposeisnottherightcourseortheproper way! Is
it fitting in this situation for me to take to the field?The one who
should set out is a warrior I choose from your bravest and strongest. I
should not aban- don the main army, the capital city, the public
treasury, collection of revenues, dispensation of justice, or oversight
of petitioners' rights! I should not ride in one battalion to chase
another, shaken about like an arrow shaft in an empty quiver! I am the
pivot in the grinding stone. It rotates around me while I remain in my
place. If I were to abandon it, it would spin out of control and its
base would shudder and break. God's life! This is a terrible
proposition! By God, again! Were it not for my hope of earning a
martyr's death when I encounter the enemy---an encounter that is
preordained!---I would fetch my camel and ride away. I would not seek
you out then for as long as the north and the south winds blow. 1.117
From an address by ʿAlī: By God! I have been taught the transmission of
God's messages, the fulfill- ment of his pledges, and the full meaning
of his words.2 We---the people of his Prophet's house---possess the keys
to wisdom and the light of command. Hark! All trodden paths of religion
are as one, its roads lead to the same destination.
WhoevertraversesthemcatchesupwiththosewhowentbeforeandwinsGod's favors,
and whoever stays back strays from the path and earns regret. Set aside
deedsforthedayforwhichallprovisionsarehoarded,inwhichallheartswillbe
tested. If your intelligence does not benefit you now, that which is
farther from you is even more out of your reach, and that which is
absent is even less acces- sible.3 Protect yourself from a fire whose
heat is intense, whose pit is deep, and 1 Excerpt from an address by
ʿAlī in Kufa to supporters, castigating their apathy, in the wake of a
Syrian raid on an Iraqi town after the Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658.
Ḥ7:287. 2 The first part of the sentence may also be read as "I know
about ..." (ʿalimtu, vs. ʿullimtu). The sentence's referents are as
follows: "messages" refers to the Shariʿah; "pledges" refers to either
God's pledges to his prophets and humankind, or Muḥammad's pledges that
ʿAlī fulfilled on his behalf; and "full meanings of his words" refers to
the Qurʾan's inner meaning (taʾwīl). Ḥ 7:288--289; R 2:25; B 458--459. 3
Two interpretations: (1) Whoever is not benefitted by his own
rationality that is present in him is incapable of being helped by the
wits of another who is separate from him and unable to benefit from the
mind of a person who is absent from him (Ḥ7:289--290). (2) One who does
not benefit now from the presence of his intelligence, will not benefit
from it when it leaves him when death arrives, or afterward, when he
faces the conditions of the hereafter (B 459). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 296 Text
and Translation
ديدحاهتيلِحوديعباهرعقوديدشاهّرحاًراناوقّتٱوزوعأهبئاغوزجعأهنعهبزاعفهّبُ لرضاح
ألا وإنّ اللسان الصالح يجعله الله للمرء في الناس خير له من المال يورثه من
لا يحمده. 1.118ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد قام رجل من أصحابه فقال نهيتنا
عن الحكومة ثم أمرتنا بها فما ندري أي ّ الأمرين أرشد فصفق عليه السلام
إحدى يديه على الأخرى ثمّقال هذا جزاء من ترك العقدة أما والله لو أن ّ ي
حين أمرتكم بما أمرتكم به حملتكم على المكروه الذي يجعل الله فيه خيرًا فإن
ٱستقمتم هديتكم وإن ٱعوججتم قوّمتكم وإن أبيتم تداركتكم لكانت الوثقى ولـكن
بِم َ ن ْ وإلى مَنْ . أريد أن أداوي بكم وأنتم دائي كـ⟩ناقش الشو كة بالشو كة
وهو يعلم أنّ ضَلْعها معها⟨. اللّٰهمّ قد ملّت أطبّاء هذا الداء الدوي ّ وكلّت
النزعة هومكحأف نآرقلا اوأرقو هولبقف مالسإلا ىلإ اوعُد نيذلا موقلا نيأ .ّيكَ
ّرلا ناطشأب ِّللا اوهَ ّلَوف داهجلا ىلإ اوجْيِهو قاحَ أولادها وسلبوا السيوف
أغمادها وأخذوا بأطراف ضعب .ا ً ّفص ا ً ّفصو اًفحز اًفحز ضرألا ٌ هلك وبعض
نجا لا يبشرّون بالأحياء ولا يعزّون عن القتلى١ مُرْهُالعيون من البكاء خُمْص
البطون من الصيام ذُبْل الشِّفاه من الدعاء صُفْر الألوان من السهر على وجوههم
غبرة الخاشعين أولئك إخواني الذاهبون فحقّ لنا أن نظمأ إليهم ونعض ّ الأيدي
على فراقهم. إنّ الشيطان ي ُ سَنّي لـكم طرقه ويريد أن يحلّ دينكم عقدة عقدة
ويعطيكم بالجماعة الفرقة٢ فٱصدفوا عن نزغاته ونفثاته وٱقبلوا النصيحة ممّن
أهداها إليكم وٱعقلوها على أنفسكم. ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ:
⟩الموتى⟨. ٢ش،ن،م،ومصحّحةفي ھ:كذا.ي،وأصلھ،وهامشم:أضيفت ⟩وبالفرقةالفتنة⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
297 whose ornaments are chains of iron. Listen to me! A pious
reputation, one that God sustains through people's tongues, is better
for a person than any wealth he may leave behind for his ungrateful
heirs. 1.118 FromanaddressbyʿAlī,whenoneof
hisassociatesstoodupandconfrontedhim, saying, "You forbade us to enter
into arbitration then commanded us to enter it, and we don't really know
which of the two was the more reasonable course." ʿAlī clapped one hand
over the other in frustration and anger, then spoke:1 This is how one
who relinquishes a sound position is rewarded! By God! Had I forced
you---when I commanded you what I did---to follow the hard course in
which God has ordained good, that sound position would have been estab-
lished. Then, if you had stayed resolute, I would have guided you, if
you had deviated, I would have straightened you, and if you had balked,
I would have set you right. But with whom, and through whom! I apply you
as the cure when you are my disease, like ⟨a person who extracts a thorn
with a thorn,
knowingthattheoneinclinestowardtheother!⟩2OGod!Howwearythephysi- cian
treating this vicious disease! How tired the water-drawer hauling up
these well ropes! O where are the people who were called to Islam and
accepted it, who recited the Qurʾan and acted on it, who were urged to
fight and raced to it? They tore camels from nurslings, snatched swords
from their sheaths, and set out to the far regions of the earth,
marching steadily, row by row. Some perished, and some survived, neither
gladdened by their living nor saddened by their dead, their eyes raw
from weeping, their stomachs lean from fast- ing, their lips withered
from praying, their color pale from wakeful nights, and their faces
dusty from long prostration. Those were my departed brothers! It is only
right that I should thirst for them, that I should wring my hands at
their separation! Satan has smoothed his paths for you. He wants to undo
your religion, knot by knot, and replace your unity with dissent. Reject
his incite- ments and whisperings! Accept your benefactor's counsel and
guard it with care! 1 I have added the words "in frustration and anger"
for clarity. The confronter is a member of the newly emerging Kharijite
group in Kufa, following the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657, challeng- ing
ʿAlī for his acceptance of the arbitration. Details in Ḥ7:294, R 2:31, B
460. Iskāfī (Miʿyār, 241) places the latter lines of the second
paragraph as an answer to a group who claimed to be his followers, while
ʿAlī denied that they were, for they did not possess the pious qualities
outlined here. 2 Proverb denoting a person who seeks aid against his
enemy from his enemy's kin. Ḥ7:292-- 294; R 2:30; B 460; ʿA 620.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 298 Text and
Translation
1.119ومنكلاملهعليهالسلامقالهللخوارجوقدخرجإلىمعسكرهموهممقيمونعلىإنكار
الحكومة فقال عليه السلام أكلـّكم شهد معنا صفّين فقالوا منّا من شهد ومنّا من
لم يشهد قال ىدانو.همالكباً ّ
لكمّلكأىّتحةقرفاهدهشيملنموةقرفنيّفصدهشنمنكيلفنيتقرفاوزاتمٱف الناس فقال
أمسكوا عن الكلام وأنصتوا لقولي وأقبلوا بأفئدتكم إليّ فمن نشدناه شهادة
فليقل بعلمه فيها ثمّكلّمهم عليه السلام بكلام طويل من جملته أن قال انتوعد
ُلهأو انُ ناوخإ ًةعيدخو اً ركموً ةليغوً ةليح فحاصملا مهعفر دنع اولوقت ملأ
ٱستقالونا وٱستراحوا إلى كتاب الله سبحانه فالرأي القبول منهم والتنفيس
عنهم فقلت لـكم هذا أمر ظاهره إيمان وباطنه عدوان وأوّله رحمة وآخره ندامة
فأقيموا على شأنكم وٱلزمواطريقتكم وعضّوا على الجهاد بنواجذ كم ولاتلتفتوا
إلى ناعق نعق إنأجيب أضلّ ّ لص هللا لوسر عم اّ نك دقلف .ّلذ كرُ ت نإو ى الله
عليه وآله وإنّ القتل ليدور بين الآباء ّقحلاىلعاً ّيِضُمواًناميإاّلإةّدشوةبيصم
ّلكىلعدادزنامفتابارقلاوناوخإلاوءانبألاو مالسإلا يف انناوخإ لتاقن انحبصأ
اّمنإ اّ نكلو .حارجلا ضضم ىلع اًربصو رمألل اًميلستو ُ لَ ي ةلصخ يف انعمط اذإف
ليوأتلاو ةهبشلاو جاجوعالاو غيزلا نم هيف لخد ام ىلع مّالله .اهاوس اّمع
انكسمأو اهيف انبغر اننيب اميف ةّيقبلا ىلإ اهب ىنادتنو انَ ثَعَش اهب 1.120ومن
كلام له عليه السلام قاله لأصحابه في وقت الحرب وأي ّ ٱمرئ منكم أحس ّ من
نفسه رباطة جأش عند اللقاء ورأى من أحد من إخوانه فشل ً ا فليذب ّ عن أخيه
بفضل نجدته التي ف ُ ضِّل بها عليهكما يذب ّ عن نفسه فلو شاء مركأ ّنإ براهلا
هزجعُ ي الو ميقملا هتوفي ال ثيثح بلاط توملا ّنإ هلثم هلعجل هللا الموت
القتل والذي نفس ٱبن أبي طالب بيده لَأَلْف ضربة بالسيف أهون من مِيتة على
الفراش.١ ١ش،ن،م،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ي،وأصلھ:أضيفت ⟩فيغيرطاعةالله⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
299 1.119 This is from ʿAlī's address to the Kharijites---who condemned
his acceptance of the arbitration---after he had marched to their
encampment.1 He first asked, "Were all of you present with me at
Ṣiffīn?" "Some among us were, and others were not," they replied. He
then instructed, "Separate into two groups, those present at Ṣiffīn and
those not, so I can address each group according to their position." He
then called out in a raised voice, "Stop your talk, listen to my words,
and attend with your hearts, and if I ask a person to testify about a
point, let him say what he knows about it." After this, he spoke with
them at length, and this is some of what he said: When the Syrians
raised leaves from the Qurʾan on spears---using trickery, deception,
cunning, and lies---wasn't it you who said, "These are our brothers and
people of our faith who beg us to cease fighting and take refuge in the
Book of God---we should accept what they offer and deliver them from
calamity"? I said to you then, "This is an affair whose facade is faith
but whose reality is pure malice, its beginning is mercy, but its end is
regret. So keep to your posi- tions and stay steady on your path, bite
down with your back teeth and fight, and do not heed this errant
bleater. If you accept his call, he will lead you astray, if you don't,
we will defeat him."When we were with God's Messenger, we stood
byhimwhenfightingragedbetweenfathers,sons,brothers,andkin.Calamities and
hardships only increased our faith, our steadfastness in truth, our
accep- tance of God's command, and our fortitude in the face of painful
wounds. But here, today, we have had to fight our brothers in Islam over
their deviations, deviances, doubts, and false interpretations. When I
thought there could be a way in which God may yet bring order to our
scattered nation, and by which we may yet draw closer and conciliate, I
was hopeful, and so I desisted from the other course. 1.120 From an
address by ʿAlī to his supporters before the start of a battle:2 If any
of you finds composure in his heart when meeting the enemy, and if he
senses fear in one of his brothers, he should use his courage to defend
him just as he defends himself. Had God wished it, he wouldhave
createdthem both the same. Death is an assiduous seeker. No one who
stays home escapes it, and no one who flees battle eludes it. The most
honorable death is on the battlefield. By the one who holds the soul of
Abū Ṭālib's son in his hand, a thousand sword strikes are easier to bear
than dying on your bed! 1 Presumably, leading up to or just before the
Battle of Nahrawān, in Kufa or Nahrawān, in 37/657 or 38/658. I have
added the words "his acceptance of" for clarity. 2 Thesecond
paragraphisplacedbyYaʿqūbī(Tārīkh,2:209) at theBattleof theCamel in
36/656. However, according to ms N, the next two texts---§1.121 and
§1.122---are part of the same ora- tion, and §1.122, according to Ḥ8:9,
is from the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657. It is possible that ʿAlī may
have given similar counsel before both battles. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 300 Text
and Translation 1.121ومن كلام له عليه السلام وكأن ّ ي أنظر إليكم ت َ
متيّلُخ دق اًميَض نوعنمت الو ا ً ّقح نوذخأت ال بابِّضلا شيشك نوّشِك والطريقَ
فالنجاة للمقتحم والهلـكة للمتلوّم. 1.122ومن كلام له عليه السلام في حض ّ
أصحابه على القتال 1.122.1فقدّموا الدارع وأخّروا الحاسر وعضّوا على الأضراس
فإنّه أَنْبٰى للسيوف عن الهام وٱلْت َ وُوا في أطراف الرماح فإنّه أَمْوَر للأسنّة
وغُضّوا الأبصار فإنّه أربط للجأش اهوّلخت الو اهوليمُ ت الف مكَتيارو .لشفلل
درطأ هّنإف تاوصألا اوتيمأو بولقلل نكسأو ولا تجعلوها إلّا بأيدي شجعانكم١
والمانعين الذِّمار منكم فإنّ الصابرين على نزول الحقائق همالذينيَح ُ ُ
يفاهنعنورّخأتيالاهمامأواهءاروواهْيَ فافِحاهنوفنتكيومهتاياربنوّف سلموها ولا
يتقدّمون عليها فيفردوها. أَجزَأَ ٱمرؤٌقِرْن َ ه وآسى أخاه بنفسه ولم ي َ كِلْ قرنه
إلى أخيه فيجتمع عليه قرنه وقرن أخيه. 1.122.2ميماهَ ل متنأو .ةرخآلا فيس نم
اوملست ال ةلجاعلا فيس نم متررف نئل هللا ميٱو العرب والسنام الأعظم إنّ في
الفرار مَوجِدةَالله والذلّ اللازم والعار الباقي وإنّ الفارّ غير مزيد في عمره
ولا محجوز بينه وبين يومه مَن رائحٌإلى الله كالظمآن يرد الماء الجنّة مهتعامج
ضضفٱف ّقحلا اوّدَر نإف ّمهّٰللا ٢.رابخألا ىلبُ ت مويلا يلاوعلا فارطأ تحت وشتّت
كلمتهم وأَب ْ سِلْهم بخطاياهم إنّهم لن يزولوا عن مواقفهم دون طعنٍ دِراكٍ ىّتحو
مادقألاو دعاوسلا ردنُ يو ماظعلا حيطيو ماهلا قلفي برضو ميسنلا هنم جرخي ١ن،
ي، ش، ھ: كذا. م، ومصحّحة في ش: ⟩شجعائكم⟨. ٢م، ن، ش: كذا. ي، ھ، ونسخة
فيشمععلامةمعًا: ⟩الأخيار⟨.وأضيفتفيي،وفيهامشھ: ⟩واللهلأناأشوقإلىلقائهم
منهمإلىديارهم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
301 1.121 From an address by ʿAlī:1 I see you now, scuttling away like a
group of thorn-tailed lizards, neither demanding your rights, nor
defending against attackers. But you are free to choose your path! Those
who brave danger will be saved, those who hold back will perish. 1.122
From an address by ʿAlī urging his followers to fight:2 1.122.1
Placethearmor-cladinfrontandtheunprotectedbehind.Bitedownon your back
teeth, for that will blunt the blades that strike at your heads. Twist
when facing lances, for that will make spearheads glance off your body.
Focus your eyes low, for that will calm your hearts. Kill idle talk, for
that will boost your courage. Don't let your banner list, or leave it
unprotected, or give it to any but your bravest warriors who are staunch
in defending honor. Indeed, those whoarevaliantinthefaceof
deathwillguarditandsurrounditfrombothsides and from front and back,
neither falling back and surrendering it, nor rushing ahead and leaving
it unguarded. Each man should tackle his own opponent and also come to
his brother's aid. He should never leave his own opponent for his
brother to face, such that both his and his brother's opponents join
forces against his brother. 1.122.2 By God, if you are successful in
fleeing the sword of this world you will still not be safe from the
sword of the hereafter. This, when you are chieftains of the Arabs and
the lofty crest of the camel's hump! Fleeing from the battle- field
earns God's wrath, eternal dishonor, and lasting shame, and anyway, the
abscondercannotincreasehislifespan---nothingwillprotecthimwhenhisday
arrives. Who among you will return to God in the evening like a thirsty
man coming to a waterhole? Paradise lies beneath the points of tall
spears! This is the day when resolutions will be tested---O God, scatter
the enemy if they chal- lenge the truth, divide their views, and destroy
them for their sins! They will be dislodged from their positions only
when sharp spears leave gaping wounds on
theirtorsos,andcuttingswordssplitskulls,slicebones,andseverarmsandlegs,
1 Presumably also delivered at the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657. As
mentioned, according to ms N, this text and the one after it---§1.121
and 1.122---are a continuation of §1.120. 2 Delivered just before the
Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657 (Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:16--17; Ḥ8:9). As men-
tioned, according to ms N, this text and the one before it---§1.121 and
1.122---are a continua- tion of §1.120. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 302 Text
and Translation َ جُي ىّتح ١بئالجلا اهوفقت بئاتكلاب اومَجرُ يو رسانملا
اهعبتت رسانملاب اوَمرُ ي مهدالبب َ ّر الخميس يتلوه الخميس وحتّى ت َ دعَق
الخيول في نواحر أرضهم وبأعنان مساربهم٢ ومسارحهم. ق َ ّدلا⟨قْع َ ّدلا⟩ ّ
أي تدق ّ الخيول بحوافرها أرضهم. ⟩نواحر أرضهم⟨متقابلاتها. يقال ⟩منازل بني
فلان تتناحر⟨أي تتقابل. 1.123هباحصأ هيف ّمذيو لاجرلا ميكحت اوركنأ اّ مل
جراوخلا ىنعم يف مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو قال عليه السلام إنّا لم
نحكمّالرجال وإنّما حكّمنا القرآن وهذا القرآن إنمّا هو خط ّ مسطور بين الدفّتين
لا ّمكحن نأ ىلإ موقلا اناعد اّ ملو .لاجرلا هنع قطني امّنإو نامجرت نم هل
ّدب الو ناسلب قطني بيننا القرآن لم نكن الفريق المتول ّ يِفْمُتْعَزاَنَت نِإَ ف﴿
هناحبس هللا لاقو هللا باتك نع ي ش َ يْءٍف َ ر ُ َ ل ِإُهو ُ ّد ذخأن نأ
لوسرلا ىلإ هّدرو هباتكب مكحن نأ هللا ىلإ هّدرف﴾لوُسَ ّرلاَوِهّٰللا ى بسنّته فإذا
حُكم بالصدق في كتاب الله فنحن أحقّ الناس به وإن حكم بسنّة رسول الله فنحن
أولاهم به. وأمّا قولـكم لِم َجعلت بينك وبينهم أجل ً ا في التحكيم فإنّما
فعلت ذلك ليتبي ّ نالجاهلويتثبّتالعالمولعلّ
اللهأنيصلحفيهذهالهدنةأمرهذهالأمّةولايؤخذ بأكظامها فتعجّل عن تبي ّ ن الحقّ
وتنقاد لأوّل الغيّ. إنّ أفضل الناس عند الله من كان العمل بالحقّ أحب ّ إليه
وإن نقصه و َ ثَ رَك ُهاتُ ي نيأف هدازو ةدئاف هيلإ ّرج نإو لطابلا نم ه
بكمومنأينأُتيتم.استعدّواللمسيرإلىقومحَيارىعنالحقّ لايبصرونهومُوزَعينبالجور لا
يعدلون به جفاة عن الكتاب ن ُ رفاوز الو اهب قلعُ ي ةقيثوب متنأ ام قيرطلا
نع بْك يعتصم إليها لبئس حُشّاش نار الحرب أنتم أُف مكيدانأ اًموي اًحَرَ ب مكنم
تيقل دقل مكـل ٍّ ويومًا أناجيكم فلا أحرارٌعند النداء ولا إخوان ثقة عند
النِّجاء. ١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩الحلائب⟨. ٢م،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.ش: ⟩مشاربهم⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
303 when they are attacked by column after column and battered by
battalions and cavalry, when their lands are attacked by army upon army,
when the interlock- ing arteries of their terrain and the open vistas of
their trails and pastures are trampled by squadrons of cavalry. Raḍī:
"Trample (daʿq)" means pounding, i.e., squadrons of cavalry pounding the
terrain with their horses' hooves. "Interlocked arteries of their
terrain (nawāḥir arḍihim)" are separate sections that face one another.
It is said "the campsites of such-and-such tribe are as interlocked
necks (manāzilu banī fulānin tatanāḥaru)," meaning they face one
another. 1.123 From ʿAlī's address censuring the Kharijites when they
condemned his appoint- ment of men to arbitrate:1 I did not appoint men
to arbitrate---I sought arbitration from the Qurʾan. But yes, this
Qurʾan is a set of written lines enclosed by two covers; it does not
speak with a tongue and thus has need of an interpreter, and those who
speak on its behalf are men. When the Syrians proposed to have the
Qurʾan arbitrate between us, I did not turn away from God's Book, for he
has said «If you dis- agree about something, refer it to God and his
Messenger.»2 To refer it to God is to rule by his Book, and to refer it
to the Messenger is to follow the Messen- ger's Sunnah. Had the
arbitration been executed by the Book of God, I would have been found to
be the person most worthy of the caliphate. If it had been
executedaccordingtotheSunnahof God'sMessenger,Iwouldhavebeenestab-
lished as the most deserving. You object, "Why did you allow them an
interval to decide the arbitration?" I did so in order that the ignorant
might see the light and the informed might gain strength. I hoped that
in the interim of truce God would stabilize the community, so it would
not be grabbed by the throat and
rushedbackintoerrorbeforethetruthwasbecameclear.ThebestmaninGod's
eyesholdsrightdearerthanwrong,nomatterhowhardorpainfulitistoacton, and
no matter how much gain or benefit it brings. Pray, then, whereto do you
stray, what corrupted you? Prepare to march against that confounded
group of men who cannot see the truth! Seduced by tyranny, they cling to
it; uneasy with the Book, they stray from its path. But you are also not
a sturdy rope to cling to, or mighty lions who defend! What courage have
the likes of you to ignite the blaze of combat? Shame! All you give me
is pain! One day I rally you in public, the next I urge you in private,
but your response to a call to muster is not that of the free and brave,
or, when approached in confidence, of brothers I can trust. 1 Delivered
at the Kharijites' camp outside Kufa after the arbitration in 37/658. B
465; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:66. 2 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:59. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 304 Text
and Translation 1.124ليضفت ريغ نم ءاطعلا يف ةوسأ سانلا هرييصت ىلع بتوع اّ
مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو أولي السابقات والشرف قال أتأمرون ّ ي أن أطلب
النصر بالجور فيمن وليت عليه والله ما أَطُورُبه ما سَم َ َ ّمَأ امو ريمس ر
١.مهل لاملا امّنإو فيكف مهنيب تيّوسل يل لاملا ناك ول اً مجن ءامسلا يف مجن
ثمّقال عليه السلام ألا وإنّ إعطاء المال في غير حقّه تبذير وإسراف وهو يرفع
صاحبه في الدنيا ويضعه في الآخرة ويكرمه في الناس ويهينه عند الله ولم يضع
ٱمرؤ ماله في غير حقّه وعند غير أهله إلّا حرمه الله شكرهم وكان لغيره ودّهم
فإن زل ّ ت به النعل يومًا فٱحتاج إلى معونتهم .ليلخُمَأْلَأو نيدخ ُ ّرشف
1.125ومن كلام له عليه السلام للخوارج أيضًا فإن أبيتم إلّا أن تزعموا أن ّ ُ
تَ مِلَ ف تللضو تأطخأ ي ضلّلون عامّة أمّة محمّد صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بضلالي
وتأخذونهم بخطأي وتكفّرونهم بذنوبي. سيوفكم على عواتقكم تضعونها مواضع
البراءة والسقم وتخلطون من أذنب بمن لم يذنب. وقد علمتم أنّ رسول الله صل ّ
ى الله عليه وآله رجم الزاني ثمّصل ّ ى عليه ثمّورّثه أهله وقتل القاتل وورّث
ميراثه أهله وقطع السارق وجلد الزاني غير المحصَن ثمّقسم عليهما من الفَيء
ونكحا المسلمات. فأخذهم رسول الله بذنوبهم وأقام حقّ الله فيهم ولم يمنعهم
سهمهم من الإسلام ولم يُخرج أسماءهم من بين أهله ثمّ أنتم ش ِ رار الناس ومن
رمى به الشيطان مراميه َ هيِ تهببرضو ه.وسيهلكفيّصنفانمحب ّ مفرطيذهببهالحب ّ
إلىغيرالحقّ ومبغض ١م،ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.مصحّحةفين،ش،ھ: ⟩إنّماالمالمالالله⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
305 1.124 From an address by ʿAlī responding to the outpouring of
complaints when he standardized treasury stipends with no privilege for
precedence or nobility:1 Do you urge me to seek victory by oppressing
the people I rule? By God, no, I will never do so, not as long as the
night-watch is kept or while one star fol- lows another in the heavens!
If the funds had been mine, I would still have distributed them equally.
How, then, when they belong to the people? Then he said: Listen to me!
Awarding funds from the treasury to those who have no right to them
counts as waste and squandering. It elevates the provider on earth but
lowers his worth in the hereafter, it ennobles him among people but
belittles him in the eyes of God.When a man gives money for unrighteous
ends to unde- serving recipients, God deprives him of their gratitude
and veers their loyalty toward another. Then, if one day his foot slips
and he needs their help, his pre- vious act will reveal itself to be his
worst bedfellow and most sordid friend. 1.125 From another address by
ʿAlī to the Kharijites:2 Even if you insist---and you do so wrongly---on
believing that I have sinned and erred, then why do you hold the whole
of Muḥammad's community errant because of my supposed error?3 Why do you
hold them responsi- ble for my sin and label them unbelievers because of
my transgression? You strap swords to your shoulders and use them
equally against the sound and the sick, placing the sinner with those
who have not sinned. You know that the Messenger stoned the fornicator
then prayed over him and allowed his family to inherit. He executed the
murderer then distributed his property to his family. He cut the hand of
the thief and flogged the unmarried fornica- tor yet continued to give
them a share of the war booty and allowed them to marry Muslim women.
The Messenger punished these sinners for their sins and carried out
God's mandated penalties, yet he did not deprive them of their share of
Islam's benefits, nor did he remove their names from the roster of
Muslims. But you! You are the worst of people! In you, Satan has struck
his target. Through you, he has accomplished his mission of obfusca- 1
Excerpt from an oration---followed, according to Ibn Qutaybah (Imāmah,
1:174), by §1.95, and also including §1.140---delivered at Ṣiffīn
(37/657), when some of ʿAlī's associates told him about Muʿāwiyah's
lavish rewarding of his supporters and urged him to do the same
(Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 185; similar context in §1.203). For a brief discussion
of this issue, and further primary source references, see Qutbuddin,
"ʿAlī's Contemplations on this World and the Hereafter in the Context of
His Life and Times," 339--340. 2 In Nahrawān, just before the battle,
38/658. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:85. 3 The Kharijites claimed that ʿAlī and his
followers had left Islam because they had agreed to human arbitration,
and thus they held their blood licit. On the Kharijite doctrine
declaring those who commit a 'major sin' to have apostatized, see
Ḥ8:113--118. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 306 Text and
Translation مفرط يذهب به البغض إلى غير الحقّ وخير الناس فيّ حالًا النمط
الأوسط فٱلزموه وٱلزموا السواد الأعظم فإنّ يد الله على الجماعة وإيّاكم
والفرقة فإنّ الشاذّ من الناس للشيطانكماأنّ
الشاذّةمنالغنمللذئبألامندعاإلىهذاالشعارفٱقتلوهولوكانتحت عمامتي هذه. فإنّما
حُكِّم الح َ كَمان ليحييا ما أحيا القرآن ويميتا ما أمات القرآن وإحياؤه
الاجتماع عليه وإماتته الافتراق عنه فإن جرّنا القرآن إليهم ٱتّبعناهم وإن
جرّهم إلينا ٱتّبعونا. فلم آت ُ تْلَ تَخ الو اً رْجُب مكـل ابأ ال ِ كم عن أمر كم
ولا لبّسته عليكم إنّما ٱجتمع رأي امهو ّقحلا اكرتو هنع اهاتَ ف نآرقلا ايّدعتي
ال نأ امهيلع انذخأ نيلجر رايتخٱ ىلع مكِئَ لَم ِ نارصبُ ي ه وكان الجور هَواهُما
فم َ ضَيا عليه وقد سبق ٱستثناؤنا عليهما في الحكومة بالعدل والص
.امهمكحَروجو امهيأرَءوس ّقحلل دْم َ ّ 1.126ومن كلام له عليه السلام فيما
يخـبر به عن الملاحم بالبصرة يا أحنف كأن ّ ي به وقد سار بالجيش الذي لا
يكون له غُبار ولا لَج َ ب ولا قعقعة لُج ُ م ولا حمحمة خيل يثيرون الأرض
بأقدامهم كأنّها أقدام النعام. يومئ بذلك إلى صاحب الزنج. ثمّقال عليه السلام
ويل لسِكَكِكُم العامرة ودُور كم المزخرفة التي لها أجنحةكأجنحة النسور وخراطيم
ُ ليتقبَدنُ يالنيذلاكئلوأنمةلَ يِفلاميطارخك همولايفقدغائبهم.أناكَاب
اههجولايندلا ُ ّ وقادرها بقَدْرها وناظرها بعينها. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 307 tion.Twotypesof
people---withregardtotheirrelationshipwithme---willper- ish: one who
loves to excess, whose love crosses the boundary of right, and one who
hates, whose hate crosses the boundary of right.1 The best of people---
withregardtotheirrelationshipwithme---aretheoneswhokeeptothemiddle
road,2sokeeptoit!Keeptotheassembledgroup,forGod'shandguidesthecon-
gregation.Bewareof division,fortheisolatedindividualishuntedbySatan,just
as the lone sheep is hunted by the wolf. Kill any person who calls to
that evil banner,evenif
thatmanwereme,themanwearingthisturban!Thearbitrators' charge was to
revive what revives the Qurʾan and to kill what kills the Qurʾan. To
revive the Qurʾan is to unite around it, and to kill it is to splinter
from it. The mandate was that if the Qurʾan drew us to them, we would
follow them, and if it drew them to us, they would follow us. I have
committed no wrong--- may you have no fathers! I did not deceive you or
muddy your affair. It was you, the majority of you, who chose these two
men. I made them pledge that they would not transgress the Qurʾan, but
they strayed from it and abandoned the truth, while seeing it all the
while in front of them. Their intent was to oppress, and they did. I had
made their arbitration contingent upon justice and truth--- by their
corrupt judgment and unjust ruling they have invalidated it. 1.126 From
an address by ʿAlī foretelling epic fighting in Basra:3 Listen, Aḥnaf! I
see him marching with troops that raise no dust, that make no sound,
with no clanking of irons or neighing of horses, their feet silently
pounding the earth like swift ostriches. Raḍī: In these lines, ʿAlī
predicted the uprising of the Chief of the Zanj.4 Then he said: Grief to
your flourishing quarters and beautiful homes, with their eagle wings
and elephant trunks,5 from an army whose dead will go unmourned and
whose missing will go unnoticed! As for me, I hurl the world on its
face, I measure it for what it is worth, I view it with its own eyes! 1
On the so-called Exaggerators (ghulāt), who attributed divinity to ʿAlī,
see Ḥ8:119--122; Asatryan, Controversies in Formative Shiʿi Islam; Halm,
Die islamische Gnosis; Halm, "Golāt," EIr. On the 'haters,' usually
taken to mean the Umayyads and the Kharijites, see Husayn, Opposing the
Imām: The Legacy of the Nawāṣib in Islamic Literature. 2 Reference to
Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:143. 3 Partof
anoration---thatincludes§1.98and§1.99---whichʿAlīdeliveredinBasraimmediately
after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656. B 480; ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, Maṣādir,
2:202, 203, 288. 4 The Chief of the Zanj was ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Zanjī
(d. 270/883), who led the 15-year rebel- lion that ravaged southern Iraq
from 255/869 to 270/883. For details, see Ḥ8:126--214 (includes excerpts
from Ṭabarī, Masʿūdī, and other early historical sources); Ṭabarī,
History, vol. 17: The Revolt of the Zanj; Popovic, "al-Zand̲j̲, 2. The
Zand̲j̲ revolts in ʿIrāḳ,"ei2. 5 "Eaglewings(ajniḥah)"of
housesrefertooverhangingwoodendormers,and"elephanttrunks (kharāṭīm)"
refer to waterspouts snaking down from the roof (Ḥ8:125; B 480; ʿA 623).
Or, to the houses' detailed decorations, and their height (R 2:44).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 308 Text and
Translation ومنه ويومئ به إلى وصف الأتراك كأن ّ نوبقتعيو جابيدلاو قَرَ
ّسلا نوسبلي ةقّرطملا ّناجَملا مههوجو ّنأك اًموق ١مهارأ ي الخيل العِتاق ويكون
هناك ٱستحرار قتل حتّى يمشي المجروح على المقتول ويكون المفلت أقلّ من
المأسور.
فقاللهبعضأصحابهلقدأعطيتياأميرالمؤمنينعلمالغيبفضحكعليهالسلاموقالللرجل اً
ّيبلك ناكو يا أخا كلب ليس هو بعلم غيب وإنمّا هو تعلمّمن ذي علم وإنمّا علم
الغيب علم الساعة َ عا َ ّسلاُمْلِعُهَدنِعَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ﴿ هلوقب هللا هدّدع امو
ثْيَغْلا ُلِّزَ نُ يَوِة َ وَي َ عْلَمُمَا فِي الْأَرْحَامِ وَمَا ت َ دْرِي ن َ فْس َ ت اَذا َ ّم
ٌ كْسِب ُ غ َ دًا وَمَا ت َ دْرِي ن َ فْس ٌ بِأَي توُ مَ ت ٍضْرَأ ِّ ِ لَ عَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ
ُ يم ٌخَبِيرٌ﴾ فيعلم سبحانه ما في الأرحام من ذ كر أو أنثى وقبيح أو جميل
وسخيّ أو بخيل وشقيّ أو ال يذلا بيغلا ملع اذهف .اًقفارم نيّيبنلل نانِجلا يف وأ
اً بَطَح رانلا يف نوكي نمو ديعس ّ لص هّيبن هللا همّ لع ملعف كلذ ىوس امو هللا
اّلإ دحأ هملعي يل اعدو هينَ مَ ّ لَعف هلآو هيلع هللا ى بأن ي َ عيه صدري
وتضطمّ عليه جوانحي. 1.127ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في ذ كر المكاييل
والموازين لجأ .نوَضتقُم نونيدَمو نول َ ّجَؤُم ءايِوْثَأ ايندلا هذه نم نولمأت امو
مّكنإ هللا دابع منقوص وعمل محفوظ فرب ّ دائب مضيّع ورب ّ كادح خاسر. قد
أصبحتم في زمن لا
يزدادالخـيرفيهإلّاإدبارًاوالشرّإلّاإقبالًاوالشيطانفيهلاكالناسإلّاطمعًافهذاأوان
قويت ع ُ دّته وعمّت مكيدته وأمكنت فريسته. اضرب بطرفك حيث شئت من الناس ً
ليخبوأاً رفكهللاةمعنلّدباً ّينغوأاً رقفدباكياًريقفاّلإ٢رصبتلهف اٱتّخذالبخلبحقّ
الله رايخ نيأ .اً رقو ظعاوملا عمس نع هنذأب ّنأك اًدّرمتم وأ اً رفو كم وصلحاؤ
كم وأين أحرار كم وسمحاؤ
كموأينالمتورّعونفيمكاسبهموالمتنزّهونفيمذاهبهمأليسقدظعنواجميعًاعن ١ن، ش، ي،
ھ، ومصحّحة في م: كذا. أصل م: ⟩أنظر إليهم⟨. ٢ن، ش، ي، ھ: كذا. م: ⟩تنظر⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
309 From the same address, foretelling the coming of the Turks:1 I see
them before me now, their craggy faces latticed shields, their robes
silk and brocade, their mounts purebred steeds. I see violent fighting,
the wounded trampling the slain, hardly any escaping and a host being
captured. At that, one of ʿAlī's associates exclaimed, "You have
knowledge of the mysteries, Com- mander of the Faithful!" ʿAlī laughed
and said to the man, who was from the tribe of Kalb: This is not
knowledge of the mysteries, O Kalbite, but what I have learned from one
who had true knowledge.2 Knowledge of the mysteries constitutes know-
ing the coming hour and the things God has enumerated in his words, «God
has knowledge of the coming hour, he sends down rain, and knows what is
in wombs. No man knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no man knows the
land in which he will die, but God is all-knowing, all-aware.»3 God
knows what is in wombs, male or female, ugly or beautiful, generous or
stingy, wretched or blissful. He knows who will go to hell and who will
enjoy the company of the prophets in paradise. This is the knowledge of
mysteries that God alone pos- sesses. All else is knowledge that God
taught to his Prophet, who taught it to me, and he prayed for my heart
to preserve it and my breast to keep it safe. 1.127 From an oration by
ʿAlī about measures and weights:4 Servantsof
God!You,withallthatyoudesireof thisworld,arelodgerswithfixed timespans
and debtors whose reckoning is coming due. The term approaches and deeds
are preserved. Some who strive still squander and some who work still
lose. You live in an era when good retreats, evil advances, and Satan is
greedy for people he can throw into hell. This is that time: his army is
strong, his plots commonplace, and his victims easy prey. Look at the
people, look where you like! All you will see is paupers who suffer,
rich men who repay God's blessings with ingratitude, misers who withhold
God's due, and rebels whose ears are deaf to counsel. Where are the
virtuous and the pious, where are the free and the generous, where are
the honest earners and the people of scru- 1 The commentators explain
this prophecy as foretelling the Mongol attack on the Muslim heartlands
in the 7th/13th century initially under Chingiz Khan and culminating in
the sack of Baghdad under Chingiz's grandson Hülegü in 656/1258. For
details, see Ḥ8:218--243; Jack- son, "Hülegü b. Toluy b. Chinggis
Khān,"ei3; Biran, "Chinggis Khān,"ei3; Morgan, "Mongols," ei2. 2 The
reference is to the Prophet Muḥammad. 3 Qurʾan, Luqmān 31:34. 4 Although
this text does not mention measures or weights, presumably ʿAlī is
condemning his addressees for marketplace cheating. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 310 Text
and Translation هذه الدنيا الدنيّة والعاجلة المنغّصة وهل خلّفتم إلّا في
حُثالة لا تلتقي بذمّهم الشفتان ٱستصغارًا لقدرهم وذهابًا عن ذ الف داسفلا
رهظ﴾نوُعِجاَرِهْيَ ل ِإ اَ ّن ِإَوِهّٰلِ ل اَ ّن ِإ﴿ـف مهرك منكر ٌمغيّر ولا زاجر مزدجر
أفبهذا تريدون أن تجاوروا الله في دار قدسه وتكونوا أعزّ أوليائه عنده هيهات
لا يُخدَع الله عن جنّته ولا تنال مرضاته إلّا بطاعته. لعن الله الآمرين
بالمعروف التاركين له والناهين عن المنكر العاملين به. 1.128ةذبرلا ىلإ
جرخُأ اّ مل هللا همحر ّرذ يبأل مالسلا هيلع همالك نمو يا أبا ذرّ إنّك غضبت
لله فٱرجُ من غضبت له إنّ القوم خافوك على دنياهم وخفتهم على دينك فٱترك في
أيديهم ما خافوك عليه وٱهرب منهم بما خفتهم عليه فما أحوجهم إلى ما منعتهم
وأغناك عمّا منعوك وستعلم مَنِ الرابح غدًا والأكثر حسدًا.١ ولو أنّ السماوات
والأرض٢ كانتا على عبد رَتْقًا ثم ٱتّقى الله لجعل الله له منهما مخرجًا ولا
يؤنسنّك إلّا الحقّ ولا يوحشنّك إلّا الباطل فلو قبلت دنياهم لأحبّوك ولو قرضت
منها لآمنوك. 1.129ومن كلام له عليه السلام أيّتها النفوس المختلفة والقلوب
المتشتّتة الشاهدة أبدانهم والغائبة عنهم عقولهم أَظ ْ أَرُكم ِ س مكب علطُأ نأ
تاهيه .دسألا ةعَوْعَو نم ىزْعِ ملا روفن هنع نورفنت متنأو ّقحلا ىلع رار
١ن،ش،م،ھ،ونسخةفيي:كذا.أصلي،ونسخةفيم،ش: ⟩خسرًا⟨. ٢ن،ش،ي،ھ:
كذا.م،ومصحّحةفيھ: ⟩والأرضين⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
311 ple? They have departed this vicious, murky world, leaving you
insignificant scum, you, whose very censure lips disdain to utter, whose
slightest mention they spurn! «Truly, to God we belong, and to him we
return!»1 Corruption is everywhere, but no one condemns or changes it,
no one censures or disap- proves. Is this how you earn lodging in God's
sacred abode and seek to become his dearest friends? Perish the thought!
God cannot be tricked into giving you paradise, his pleasure is earned
only by obedience. God's curse on those who command good yet don't
perform, who forbid evil yet don't renounce! 1.128 From an address by
ʿAlī to Abū Dharr when he was exiled to Rabadhah:2 Abū Dharr, you were
roused to anger in God's cause, so place your trust in the one in whose
cause you were roused to anger. Your adversaries fear you with regard to
their worldly gain, while you fear them because of your pious beliefs.
Leave in their hands the thing they fear you will seize, and flee from
them, tak- ing with you the thing you fear they will take. How
desperately they need the thing you forbid them, and how little you need
the thing they forbid you! They will learn on the morrow who has the
most profit, who is the most envied. Even if skies and earth close in on
a true servant of God, God will show him a way to escape, if he remains
conscious of him. Let truth be your comfort, and don't be afraidof
anythingexceptkeepingcompanywithfalsehood.If youhadaccepted their
proposals for worldly gain, they would have been on your side. If you
had partaken of their offers, they would have offered you full
protection. 1.129 From an address by ʿAlī:3 You divided souls and
fragmented hearts, present in body but absent in mind! I urge you toward
truth, but you bolt from it like goats from a lion's snarl! How
impossible a task to brighten through your help this night of obscured
justice,4 1 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:156. 2
ʿAlīdeliveredthisaddresstoAbūDharral-Ghifārīontheoutskirtsof
Medina;itwasreportedly committed to memory by Dhakwān, freedman of
ʿAlī's sister Umm Hānī, who was present. I have not located the date in
the sources, but it is presumably shortly before 32/652, which is when
Abū Dharr died. Abū Dharr was one of Muḥammad's prominent and pious
compan- ions and an early convert to Islam. ʿUthmān exiled him to
Rabadhah, two hundred kilometers northeast of Medina, because he was an
outspoken supporter of ʿAlī and openly condemned the Umayyads, and he
died there. For details, see Ḥ8:252--262; B 473--474; Afsaruddin, "Abū
Dharr al-Ghifārī,"ei3. 3 Part of an oration ʿAlī delivered during his
caliphate on the pulpit of Kufa (Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 120), presumably,
based on the opening line, after the arbitration in 37/658, when he was
urg- ing his supporters to regroup to fight Muʿāwiyah. 4 Ar. sirār
al-ʿadl; the commentators give different explanations for sirār: (1) the
last (moonless) night of the month (R 2:51; Ḥ8:264); (2) a concealed
thing (B 475); (3) shining lines on some- one's forehead (Ḥ8:264). They
agree on the general meaning of the phrase that contains the word.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 312 Text and
Translation العدلأوأقيمٱعوجاجالحقّ .اللّٰهمّ
إنّكتعلمأنّهلميكنالذيكانمنّامنافسةفيسلطان ولا ٱلتماس شيء من فضول الح ُ طام
ولـكن لنردّ المعالم من دينك ونظهر الإصلاح في بلادك فيأمن المظلومون من
عبادك وتقام المعطّلة من حدودك. اللّٰهمّ إن ّ ي أوّل من أناب وسمع وأجاب لم
يسبقني إلّا رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بالصلاة. وقد علمتم أنّه لا
ينبغي أن يكون على الفروج والدماء والمغانم والأحكام وإمامة المسلمين
البخيل فتكون في أموالهم نَهْمَته ولا الجاهل فيضلّهم بجهله ولا الجافي فيقطعهم
بجفائه ولا الجانف١ للدول فيتّخذ قومًا دون قوم ولا المرتشي في الحكم فيذهب
بالحقوق ويقف بها دون المقاطع ولا المعطّل للسنّة فيهلك الأمّة. 1.130ومن خطبة
له عليه السلام 1.130.1نحمده على ما أخذ وأعطى وعلى ما أبلى وٱبتلى الباطن
لكلّ خفيّة الحاضر لكلّ سريرة العالم بما ت ُ كِنّ الصدور وما تخون العيون ونشهد
أن لا إل ٰ ه غيره وأنّ محمّدًا نجيبه وبعيثه شهادة يوافق فيها السرّالإعلان
والقلب اللسان. 1.130.2منها فإنّه والله الجدّ لا اللعب والحقّ لا الـكذب وما
هو إلّا الموت أَسْم َ عَ داعيه وأعجل حاديه فلا يغرّنّك سواد الناس من نفسك فقد
رأيت من كان قبلك ممّن جمع المال وحذر الإقلال وأمن العواقب طول أمل
وٱستبعاد أجل كيف نزل به الموت فأزعجه عن وطنه وأخذه من مأمنه محمولًا على
أعواد المنايا يتعاطى به الرجالُ الرجالَ حمل ً ا على
المناكبوإمساكًابالأنامل.أمارأيتمالذينيأملونبعيدًاويبنونمشيدًاويجمعونكثيرًا
أصبحت بيوتهم قبورًا وما جمعوا بورًا وصارت أموالهم للوارثين وأزواجهم لقوم
آخرين هلمع زافو هَ لَ هَم زّرب هبلق ىوقتلا رعشأ نمف .نوبتعتسي ةئّيس نم الو
نوديزي ةنسح يف ال ١ن،ش،ھ:كذا.م،ي،ونسخةفيھ:
⟩الخائف⟨.شرحٱبنأبيالحديدوالراوندي ّ والبحرانيّ، وأضيففيھمعلفظةمعًا:
⟩الحائف⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
313 or to straighten out the distorted truth! God!You know my intent was
not to vie for power or seek this world's fleeting possessions. I did
what I did in order to restore the waymarks of your religion and reform
your lands, so your oppressed
servantswouldfindsecurityandyourforsakenmandatesbeoncemoreupheld. God! I
am the first who turned to you, who heard and answered your call. No one
except your Messenger preceded me in the prayer of Islam. O people, you
know that one who is in charge of marriage contracts, penalties for
murder, dis- tribution of war gains, legal rulings, and leadership of
the Muslims should not be a miser or his greed would target their
property, he should not be ignorant or he would lead them astray, he
should not be harsh or he would alienate them, he should not be a tyrant
or he would favor one group over another, he should not be corrupt or he
would squander rights and be unjust in the distribution of stipends, and
he should not be a person who obstructs the Sunnah or the community
would perish. 1.130 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1.130.1
IgivepraisetoGodforwhathehastakenawayandwhathehasgranted, for what he
has gifted to us and what he has tested us with. He is aware of all that
is hidden and present with all that is concealed, he knows all that
hearts cover and all that eyes disclose. Thus, with my thoughts the same
as my dec- laration, and my heart in accord with my tongue, I testify
that there is no god other than he, and that Muḥammad is his chosen
messenger. 1.130.2 From this same oration: By God, it is seriousness, no
jest, all truth, no lies---there is nothing before you but death. Its
caller has made its voice heard, and its driver has quickened the
caravan, so don't let the recklessness of the masses distract you from
your soul. You have seen the people who went before who amassed wealth
and dreaded destitution, who were complacent about retribution because
they cherished long hopes and ignored their shrinking lifespans. You saw
death alight at each one's door, shove him out of his homeland, and
seize him from his place of safety. He was carried out on fate's wooden
planks, one group of men handing him on to another, transporting him on
their shoulders and gripping him by
theirfingers.Haveyounotseenthosewhocherishedlonghopes,raisededifices
with strong mortar, and amassed abundant wealth? Their houses have
become
graves,whattheygatheredisinruin,theirpropertyhasgonetotheirheirs,their
wives to other men. They are no longer asked to do good or to repent of
earlier sins. It is those who robe their hearts in piety, who outrace
their peers, whose deeds win the day. Work hard for this. Perform the
deeds required to win par- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 314 Text and
Translation اًزاجم مكـل تقلخ لب ماقُم راد مكـل قلخت مل ايندلا ّنإف اهلمع
ةّنجلل اولمعٱو اهلَ بَه اولِبتهٱف لتزوّدوا منها الأعمال إلى دار القرار فكونوا
منها على أوفاز وقرّبوا الظهور للزِّيال. 1.131ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.131.1وٱنقادت له الدنيا والآخرة بأزمّتها وقذفت إليه السماوات والأرضون
مقاليدها وسجدت له بالغدوّ والآصال الأشجار الناضرة وقدحت له من قضبانها
النيران المضيئة وآتت أكلها١ بكلماته الثمار اليانعة. 1.131.2منها وكتاب
الله بين أظهر كم ناطق لا ي َ عْيا لسانه وبيت لا تهدم أركانه وعزّ لا تهزم
أعوانه. 1.131.3منها أرسله على حين فترة من الرسل وتنازع من الألسن فقفّى به
الرسل وختم به الوحي فجاهد في الله المدبرين عنه والعادلين به. 1.131.4منها
ّنأ ملعيو هرصب اهذُفنَي ريصبلاو اً ئيش اهءارو اّمم رصبي ال ىمعألا رصب ىهتنم
ايندلا امّنإو
الداروراءهافالبصيرمنهاشاخصوالأعمىإليهاشاخصوالبصيرمنهامتزوّدوالأعمى لها
متزوّد. 1.131.5منها وٱعلموا أنّه ليس من شيء إلّا ويكاد صاحبه يشبع منه ويمل
ّ ه إلّا الحياة فإنّه لا يجد له في الموت راحة وإنّما ذلك بمنزلة الحكمة التي
هي حياة للقلب الميّت وبصر للعين العمياء وسمع للأذن الصمّاء وري ّ للظمآن
وفيها الغنى كلّه والسلامة. ١م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش:سقطت ⟩أكلها⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
315 adise. This world has not been created for you as a home, it has
been created for you as a passage on which to gather provisions for the
final residence. Make haste to leave it. Make ready the backs of your
camels for the journey. 1.131 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1.131.1 This
world and the hereafter have submitted their reins to God, the skies and
the earth have handed him their keys, and the blossoming trees pros-
trate to him at dawn and at dusk. From their branches, his luminous
flames are kindled, and in response to his words, they bring forth their
harvest of fruit.1 1.131.2 From the same oration: The Book of God is in
front of you. It is a speaker whose tongue does not stutter, a house
whose pillars do not collapse, and a force whose supporters are never
crushed. 1.131.3 From the same oration: God sent Muḥammad---when
prophecy had lagged, and tongues fiercely quar- reled---to follow his
messengers and seal his revelation. Muḥammad fought in God's path
against those who had turned away from him or who assigned him peers.
1.131.4 From the same oration: The blind see only this world.They cannot
see past it, whereas the sighted pen- etrate it to see what is beyond,
and they know their home is yonder.The sighted are waiting to leave it,
whereas the blind are moving toward it. The sighted gather provisions
from it, whereas the blind gather provisions for it. 1.131.5 From the
same oration:2 Know this: there is almost nothing its possessor doesn't
weary of except life--- no one ever takes comfort in death. This
knowledge is the wisdom that brings life to the dead heart, sight to the
blind eye, sound to the deaf ear, and water to the parched throat.3 It
gives you all the counsel you need, and total safety. 1 References in
this section are to Qurʾan, Ḥajj 22:18, Yāsīn 36:80, Baqarah 2:265. 2
The next three paragraphs are thematically unconnected excerpts from
different orations (Ḥ 8:288). 3 This "wisdom" refers to (1) the Qurʾan
(R 2:54); (2) the Prophet's words (Ḥ8:293); and (3) knowledge of the
hereafter (B 480). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 316 Text and
Translation كتاب الله تبصرون به وتنطقون به وتسمعون به وينطق بعضه ببعض
ويشهد بعضه على بعض لا يختلف في الله ولا يخالف بصاحبه عن الله. َ بَ
نومكنيباميف ّلِغلاىلعمتحلطصٱدق ت بحىلعمتيَ فاصتومكنَمِدىلعىعرملا َ ّ الآمال
وتعاديتم في كسب الأموال لقد ٱستهام بكم الخبيث وتاهَبكم الغَرور والله
المستعان على نفسي وأنفسكم. 1.132ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد شاوره عمر في
الخروج إلى الروم وقد توكّل الله لأهل هذا الدين بإعزاز الحوزة وستر العورة
والذي نصرهم وهم قليل ّودعلا اذه ىلإ ْرِسَ ت ىتم كّنإ .تومي ال ّيح نوعنتمي
ال ليلق مهو مهعنمو نورصتني ال نم كدعب سيل مهدالب ىصقأ نود ةفناك نيملسملل
نكت ال بَكنُ تف مهَقْلَ تف كسفنب جمع١يرجعونإليهفٱبعثإليهمرجل ً
امِحربًاوٱحفزمعهأهلالبلاءوالنصيحةفإنأظهر الله فذاك ما تحب ّ وإن تكن الأخرى
كنت رِدْءًا للناس ومثابة للمسلمين. 1.133ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد وقعت
مشاجرة بينه وبين عثمان. فقال المغيرة بن الأخنس لعثمان أنا أكفيكه فقال
أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه للمغيرة
ياٱبناللعينالأبتروالشجرةالتيلاأصللهاولافرعأنتتكفيني٢فواللهماأعزّ اللهمن
ىقبأ الف كدهج غلبأّمث كَأْوَ ن هللا دعبأ اّنع جرخا هضهنُم تنأ نم ماق الو هرصان
تنأ الله عليك إن أبقيت َ . ١م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش: كذا. ن، ھ،وأصل ش: ⟩بعدك
مرجع⟨. ٢م، ي، ھ، ونسخة في ن،ش:كذا.أصلن،ش:سقطت ⟩أنتتكفيني⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
317 By God's Book you see and perceive, through it you speak with
reason, and from it you hear the truth. One part of the Qurʾan supports
the other---it con- tains no contradictions about God, and never leads
its reader away from him. Although you hate one another, you band
together to cultivate the refuse dump of malice, clasping hands for
worldly gain, while fighting one another in the pursuit of wealth.
Surely, the evil one has caught you in his spell and arro- gance has led
you astray! I seek God's help to fight my passions and yours. 1.132 From
an address by ʿAlī responding to ʿUmar's request for advice on whether
he should lead the expedition against the Byzantines:1 God has
guaranteed to followers of this faith that he will protect their land
and guard their honor. He was the one who gave victory to their small
band when they struggled to gain the upper hand, and he protected them
when they could not protect themselves. He is the everliving who never
dies. When you lead the expedition against the enemy, if you engage them
and are pushed back, our fighters will have no stronghold to give them
refuge and will flee to dis- tant lands. If you are gone, they will have
no community to which to return. Instead, dispatch a seasoned fighter
accompanied by an experienced and intel- ligent group of warriors. If
God grants them victory, then you have achieved your goal. If the
outcome is otherwise, then you will still be here to harbor our people
and provide a haven to which our warriors can return. 1.133 From an
address by ʿAlī. ʿAlī and ʿUthmān exchanged words, whereupon al-
Mughīrahibnal-AkhnassaidtoʿUthmān,"Iwilltakecareof
himforyou."ʿAlīthundered at Mughīrah:2 You son of a barren, cursed
father, of a tree without root or branch, you will see to me? By God, no
man you support will ever obtain God's aid, no man you prop up will
remain standing! Be gone, may God starve you of rain, and do your worst!
And if you do, may God see to you! 1 In Medina, in 15/636, just before
ʿUmar, the second Sunni caliph, participated in the march to Palestine.
For details of this episode and the conquest of Syro-Palestine see
Ḥ8:298--300; B 481; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 3:608. Similar context and language
in §1.144, re ʿUmar's march against the Persians. 2 The incident took
place in Medina soon after Abū Dharr's death in exile in Rabadhah in
32/652,whenʿUthmānresolvedtoalsosendʿAmmārintoexile.ʿAlīobjected,andMughīrah---
a close associate of ʿUthmān's who would be killed alongside him---came,
along with Zayd ibn Thābit, as ʿUthmān's emissary, to remonstrate with
and threaten ʿAlī (Ibn Aʿtham, Futūḥ, 2:380). Al-Mughīrah ibn
al-Akhnas---whose brother, Abū al-Ḥakam, ʿAlī had killed at the Bat- tle
of Uḥud (details in Ḥ8:301--303)---was ʿAlī's keen enemy. On
disagreements between ʿAlī and ʿUthmān during the latter's caliphate,
see Ḥ9:3--30. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 318 Text and
Translation 1.134ومن كلام له عليه السلام رمأو يرمأ سيلو ةتْلـَ ف ياّيإ
مكتعيب نكت مل كم واحدًا إن ّ ي أريد كم لله وأنتم تريدونني لأنفسكم. أيّها
الناس أعينوني على أنفسكم وٱيم الله لأنصفنّ المظلوم ولأقودنّ الظالم بخ َ
زامته حتّى أورده منهل الحقّ وإن كان كارهًا. 1.135ومن كلام له عليه السلام في
معنى طلحة والزبير 1.135.1ِ ن مهنيبو ينيب اولعج الو اً ركنم اوركنأ ام هللاو
ص هوكرت ١ا ً ّقح نوبلطيل مهنإو اًف ْ ينود هوُ لَو اوناك نإو هنم مهبيصن مهل
ّنإف هيف مهكيرش تنك نإف هوكفس مه اًمدو َ لَ بِق اّلإ ةبِ ل َ ّطلا امف هم وإنّ
أوّل عدلهم للحكم على أنفسهم. وإنّ معي لبصيرتي ما لبّست ولا حاز دقو حضاول
رمألا ّنإو ةفدغملا ةهبشلاو ةمُ حلاو أمحلا اهيف ةيغابلاُةئفلَ ل اهّنإو ّيلع
سّبـُ ل الباطل عن نصابه وٱنقطع لسانه عن شَغَبه وٱيم الله لأفرطنّ لهم حوضًا أنا
ماتحه لا يِرِ ب هنع نوردصي ٍّ ولا ي َ عُبّون بعده في حِسْي. 1.135.2منه
١م،ش،ن،ھ:كذا.ي:أضيفت ⟩هم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
319 1.134 From an address by ʿAlī:1 Your oath of allegiance to me was
not sworn on an impulse,2 and, furthermore, our intentions are not the
same: I pursue you for the sake of God, while you pursue me for your own
ends. People, help me to make you better! By God, I shall bring justice
to the oppressed! I shall drag the oppressor by his nose-ring until I
bring him kicking and screaming to the waterhole of truth! 1.135 From an
address by ʿAlī regarding Ṭalḥah and Zubayr:3 1.135.1
ByGod,theyhavenocausetofaultme,noristhedisputetheyraiseafair one. They
demand from me a right they abandoned and vengeance for blood they
spilt. If I had been their partner in this affair, they would still have
their share of culpability. But if they have undertaken it on their
own---which they have---then they should be the target of vengeance, and
the first justice they mete out should be
againstthemselves.Butmyconvictionhas notdesertedme,
andIhaveneverdeceivednorbeendeceived!Theyarethetreacherousfaction!4
Their insides are filled with dark slime, scorpion venom, and black
suspicions.5 But the truth has become clear. Falsehood's grinding mill
has been pushed out of its pivot, and its tongue has been curbed from
inciting evil. By God, I shall fill the waterhole for them as only I
can---they shall neither leave it sated nor ever drink again from a
smooth-bottomed pond! 1.135.2 From the same address:6 1 From ʿAlī's
oration in Medina, soon after his accession to the caliphate in 35/656,
referring to ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ,
Muḥammad ibn Maslamah, Ḥas- sān ibn Thābit, and Usāmah ibn Zayd, who
refused to pledge allegiance to him and decided to sit out the ongoing
conflict. Mufīd, Irshād, 1:243, which also includes earlier lines from
this oration. 2 Refers to ʿUmar's statement, "The oath of allegiance to
Abū Bakr was driven by an impulse ( faltah), but God protected the
community from its evil. Whoever repeats such an action must be killed"
(Ḥ9:31; B 482), narrated widely in both Shiʿi and Sunni sources. 3 From
ʿAlī's oration in Dhū Qār just before he left for Basra to fight his
challengers at the Battle of the Camel, in 36/656 (Mufīd, Irshād,
1:251). See similar lines in §1.10 and §1.22. 4 The commentators state
that the definite article "al-" in al-fiʾah al-bāghiyah (the treacherous
faction) indicates ʿAlī's prior knowledge of this group based on a
portent from the Prophet. B 483; Ḥ9:37. 5 "Dark slime" (ḥamaʾ) is a
metaphor for deceit and corruption (B 483); some say it refers to the
Qurʾanic verse in Ḥijr 15:26, which says humans were made from ḥamaʾ
(Ḥ9:34). The variant
reading"relative"(ḥamā)isareferencetoZubayr,whowasthesonof
Muḥammad's,andʿAlī's, paternal aunt (ibid.). 6 Refers to the Muslims in
Medina---including Ṭalḥah and Zubayr---who rushed to ʿAlī after
ʿUthmān's death, insisting that he accept their oath of allegiance
(bayʿah). First lines are sim- ilar to §1.3.4 (Shiqshiqiyyah), §1.53,
§1.226. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 320 Text and
Translation فأقبلتم إليّ إقبال العُوذ الم َ طافيل على أولادها تقولون
البيعةَ البيعةَ قبضت كفّي اّبَ لَأو يتعيب اثكنو يناملظو يناعطق امهّنإ ّمهّٰللا
.اهومتبذاجف يدي مكتعزانو اهومتطسبف الناس عليّ فٱحلل ما عقدا ولا تحكم لهما
ما أبرما وأَرِهما الم َ ساءة فيما أمّلا وعملا. ولقد .ةيفاعلا اّدَرو ةمعنلا
اطَمَغف عاقولا مامأ امهب تينأتسٱو لاتقلا لبق امهُتْبَ ثَ تْسٱ 1.136ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام في ذ كر الملاحم 1.136.1يعطف الهوى على الهدى إذا عطفوا الهدى
على الهوى ويعطف الرأي على القرآن إذا عطفوا القرآن على الرأي. 1.136.2منها
حتّى تقوم الحرب بكم على ساق باديًا نواجذُها مملوءة أخلافها حلوًا رضاعها
علقمًا عاقبتها ألا وفي غدٍ وسيأتي غدٌ بما لا تعرفون يأخذ الوالي من غيرها
عمّالها على مساوي لدع ١فيك مكيريف اهديلاقم اً ملس هيلإ يقلتو اهدبك ذيلافأ
ضرألا هل جرختو اهلامعأ السيرة ويحيي ميّت الكتاب والسنّة. 1.136.3منها
١ن،ش،م،ھ:كذا.ي،ومصحّحةفيش:أضيفت ⟩يكون⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 321 Shouting "the oath! the oath!" you crowded around me
like camel mares snug- gling their newborn calves. I closed my palm
shut, but you forced it open. I snatched my hand away, but you pulled it
toward you. I beseech you, O God: ṬalḥahandZubayrhaveseveredmytiesof
kinship,theyhavewrongedme,they have broken their pledge of allegiance,
and incited people to march against me. Undo the knots they have tied,
unravel the ropes they have twisted, and show them the opposite of what
they wish and strive for! Before beginning the fight, I asked them to
return to their pledge; before commencing battle, I gave them a second
chance; but they have scorned my kindness and rejected my offer of
safety. 1.136 From an oration by ʿAlī containing narratives of epic
battles:1 1.136.1 He will bend passion to conform to guidance, where
others have bent guidance to conform to passion. He will bend caprice to
conform to the Qurʾan, where others have bent the Qurʾan to conform to
caprice. 1.136.2 From the same oration: War will stand fierce among you,
baring its teeth, with full udders that are sweet to suckle but leave a
bitter aftertaste of gourd.2 Be wary of the morrow which will bring you
the unknown. A new sovereign will arrive who will punish governors for
their injustice. The earth will reveal to him her inner treasures,3 and
offer him submissively the keys to her fortress. He will make you walk
the path of justice and resurrect what you have killed of the Book and
the Sun- nah. 1.136.3 From the same oration, about an unjust ruler:4 1
Part of ʿAlī's oration in Basra a few days after the Battle of the Camel
in 36/656 (Ṭabrisī, Iḥti- jāj, 1:289--290). The commentators state that
the reference in §1.136.1 and §1.136.2 is to the Messiah, who will come
at the end of time. Ḥ9:40; B 484, R 2:62. 2 The Arabic sentence begins
with ḥattā ("until"), connecting to the previous part of the text which
is not transcribed. 3 Lit. "The earth will reveal the pieces of its
liver (afālīdh kabidihā)." Translation after Ḥ9:46; B 485; R 2:62. 4 The
commentators state that this prophecy refers to the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd
al-Malik (r. 65-- 86/685--705) (Ḥ9:47; B 486), or---unlikely, I think,
because of the more immediate context of the lines following---to "a
rebel toward the end of time like Sufyānī" (R 2:63), and also because
the first few lines are similar to §1.98.3, which also, according to
them, refers to ʿAbd al-Malik. Based on the context, I have added the
phrase, "about an unjust ruler," to differentiate the paragraph from the
one before. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 322 Text and
Translation كأن ّ يبهقدن َ سورَ
ّضلافطعاهيلعفطعفنافوكيحاوَضيفهتاياربصحفوماشلاب َقَع وفرشالأرضبالرؤوسقدف َ
غَرتفاغرتهوثقلتفيالأرضوطأتهبعيدَالجولةعظيم ُ يَ ل هللاو ةلوصلا ش َ يف
لحكـلاك ليلق اّلإ مكنم ىقبي ال ىّتح ضرألا فارطأ يف مكَ ّنَدِّر العين فلا
تزالون كذلك حتّى تؤوب إلى العرب عوازب أحلامها فٱلزموا السنن القائمة
والآثار البيّنة والعهد القريب الذي عليه باقي النبوّة وٱعلموا أنّ الشيطان
إنّما ي ُ سَنّي لـكم طرقه لتتّبعوا عقبه. 1.137ومن كلام له عليه السلام في وقت
الشورى لن يسرع أحد قبلي إلى دعوة حقّ وصلة رحم وعائدةكرم فٱسمعوا قولي وَعُوا
منطقي ىّتح دوهعلا هيف ناخُتو فويسلا هيف ىضتنُ ت مويلا اذه دعب نم رمألا اذه
اورت نأ ىسع يكون بعضكم أئمّة لأهل الضلالة وشيعة لأهل الجهالة. 1.138ومن
كلام له عليه السلام في النهي عن عيب١ الناس فإنّما ينبغي لأهل العصمة
والمصنوع إليهم في السلامة أن يرحموا أهل الذنوب والمعصية ويكون الشكر هو
الغالب عليهم والحاجز لهم عنهم. فكيف بالعائب الذي عاب أخاه وعيّره ببلواه
أما ذ كر موضع ستر الله عليه من ذنوبه ما هو أعظم من الذنب الذي عاب َ ه به
وكيف يذمّه بذنب قد ركب مثله فإن لم يكن ركب ذلك الذنب بعينه فقد عصى الله
فيما سواه ممّا هو أعظم منه وٱيم الله لئن لم يكن عصاه في الـكبير وعصاه في
الصغير ُ تَأْرُ جَل هعلىعيبالناسأكبرياعبداللهلاتعجلفيعيبعبد٢بذنبهفلعل ّ
همغفورلهولا تأمن على نفسك صغير معصية فلعلّك معذّب عليه فليكفف مَن علم منكم
عيب غيره لما يعلم من عيب نفسه. وليكن الشكر شاغل ً ا له على معافاته ممّا
ٱبتلي به غيره. ١م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش، ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ھ: ⟩غِيبة⟨. ٢م، ي،
ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ: ⟩أحد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
323 I can almost see him now as he calls to his flock in Syria and
scrapes the ground for his banners to roost in the hinterlands of Kufa.
Like an ill-tempered camel mare, he snaps and nips at your townspeople.
He carpets its earth with decap- itated heads. His jaws wide open, he
stamps violently, he ranges far, and his onslaughts are brutal. By God,
he will scatter you to the ends of the earth until few remain, as specks
of kohl in the eye. You will continue thus until the Arabs'
long-departed reason returns home. During that difficult time, hold fast
to establishedpracticesandcleartraces.Looktoyourrecenterathatwasstamped
by the Prophet's mark.1 Know that Satan smooths his pathways to lure you
into treading in his steps. 1.137 From an address by ʿAlī during the
Shūrā Council:2 No one will outpace me in calling to the truth,
fostering kinship, or acting with kindness, so listen to my words and
pay attention to what I say. You will see swords drawn over this matter
after today, and pledges broken; some of you will become leaders of the
errant, others, followers of reckless fools. 1.138 From an address by
ʿAlī in which he forbade his followers from exposing people's sins: It
befits those who are protected by good character and blessed with sound
judgment to show compassion to sinners and transgressors. Gratitude
should be their dominant trait, and it should stop them from pointing
fingers. Doesn't the faultfinder who censures his brother and shames him
for his trials remem- ber the times when God concealed his own sins,
sins that were far graver than the ones he censures his brother for? How
can he condemn his brother for a sin he himself has also committed? Even
if he has not committed the exact same crime, he has still disobeyed God
in other things, some of which were perhaps more severe. By God, even if
he has committed no mortal sin, even if has transgressed only in minor
ways, his insolence in shaming others is worse than anything else. O
servant of God, don't rush to expose your fellow man's offence,
perchance God may have forgiven it! Don't think your small transgres-
sion trivial, perchance God may punish you for it! Any man who
recognizes that he too has committed shameful acts should refrain from
shaming another. Thanksgiving for being spared the other man's trials
should give him occupa- tion enough. 1 Refers to ʿAlī's own caliphate.
Ḥ9:48. 2 In Medina, 23/644. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:236; Ḥ9:49--58; details of
Shūrā Council that appointed ʿUthmān in both. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 324 Text
and Translation 1.139ومن كلام له عليه السلام أيّها الناس من عرف من أخيه
وثيقة دين وسداد طريق فلا يسمعنّ فيه أقاويل الرجال١ أما إنّه قد يرمي الرامي
وتخطئ السهام ويَحيكُ الكلام وباطل ذلك يبور والله سميع وشهيد أما إنّه ليس
بين الحقّ والباطل إلّا أربع أصابع. فسئل عليه السلام عن معنى قوله هذا فجمع
أصابعه ووضعها بين أذنه وعينه ثمّقال الباطل أن تقول سمعت والحقّ أن تقول
رأيت. 1.140ومن كلام له عليه السلام وليس لواضع المعروف في غير حقّه وعند
غير أهله من الحظ ّ فيما أتى إلّا محمدة اللئام وثناء الأشرار ومقالة الجهّال
ما دام منعمًا عليهم ما أجود يده وهو عن ذات الله بخيل
فمنآتاهاللهمالًافليصلبهالقرابةوليحسنمنهالضيافةوليفكّ بهالأسيروالعانيوليعط
منه الفقير والغارم وليصبر نفسه على الحقوق والنوائب ٱبتغاء الثواب فإنّ
فوزًا بهذه الخصال شرف مكارم الدنيا ودرك فضائل الآخرة.٢ 1.141ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام في الاستسقاء 1.141.1ألا وإنّ الأرض التي تحملـكم والسماء التي
تظلـّكم مطيعتان لربّكم وما أصبحتا تجودان لـكم ببركتهما توجّعًا لـكم ولا زلفة
إليكم ولا لخـير ترجوان ِ ه منكم ولـكن أُمرتا بمنافعكم فأطاعتا وأقيمتا على
حدود مصالحكم فقامتا إنّ الله يبتلي عباده عند الأعمال
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩الناس⟨. ٢م،ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحة
فيش:كذا.أصلش،وزيادةفيم:أضيفت ⟩إنشاءالله⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 325 1.139 From an address by ʿAlī:1 People! Whoever knows
his brother to have strong faith and good ways should not give ear to
the rumors men spread about him. An archer may shoot, and his arrows may
stray, but words always wound, and unjust words bring perdi-
tion,forGodislisteningandwitnessing.Thespanof fourfingersseparatestruth
from falsehood. ʿAlī was asked about the meaning of this statement, upon
which he lined up his fingers and placed them between his ear and his
eye, then said: "I heard," is false. "I saw," is true. 1.140 From an
address by ʿAlī:2 A person who distributes gifts in unsuitable quarters
and makes presents to undeserving people earns only the praise of the
immoral, the tribute of the wicked, and the commendation of the
ignorant. As long as he continues to show favor, these churls exclaim,
"What a generous hand he possesses!" Yet, when called to spend in God's
name, he is tightfisted. If God has granted a per- son wealth, he should
use it to help kin, feed the guest, free the captive and the hostage,3
and give to the mendicant and the debtor. Even when difficult, he should
pay his dues and endure adversities to earn God's reward.These virtues,
if won, bring honor in this world and merit in the next. 1.141 From an
oration by ʿAlī in which he supplicated God for rain: 1.141.1 Hark! The
earth that carries you and the sky that shades you obey their Lord. They
favor you with their generous blessings not because they pity you, or
seek to endear themselves to you, or hope for your reward, rather, they
have been commanded to provide you with benefit and they obey, they have
been appointed to ensure your welfare and they comply. Hear me! When
God's servants do evil things, he tests them by reducing fruits,
curtailing blessings, 1 The "span of four fingers" line is included in
the following report by al-Aṣbagh ibn Nubātah: The Byzantine Emperor
wrote ten questions to Muʿāwiyah, who could not answer, and sent a rider
to ʿAlī with the questions. Among the questions was this one, "What is
the distance between truth and falsehood?" (Thaqafī, Ghārāt,
1:187--188). Presumably in Kufa, toward the end of ʿAlī's life in
40/661. 2
Excerptfromanoration---including§1.95and§1.124---deliveredatṢiffīn(37/657),whenʿAlī's
associates informed him of Muʿāwiyah's lavish rewards and urged him to
do the same. Ḥar- rānī, Tuḥaf, 185; Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 235. 3 Ar.
ʿānī, lit. "the exhausted," is translated here as "the hostage," based
on the interpretation of the word as synonymous to "the captive" (asīr).
Ḥ9:74; B 490; R 2:63. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 326 Text and
Translation السيّئة بنقص الثمرات وحبس البركات وإغلاق خزائن الخـيرات ليتوب
تائب وي ُ قلع مقلع ويتذ كّر متذ رورُدل اً ببس رافغتسالا هناحبس هللا لعج دقو
رجدزم رجدزيو رّك الرزق ورحمة للخلق فقال ﴿ٱسْت َ غْفِر ُ ُهَ ّن ِإ ْمُكَ ّبَر او
اًراَرْدِم ْمُكْيَ لَ عَءاَم َ ّسلا ِلِسْرُ ي اًرا َ ّفَغ َناَك ردابو هتئيطخ لاقتسٱو
هتبوت لبقتسٱ أرمٱ هللا محرف ١﴾َنيِ نَبَو ٍلاَوْمَأِب ْمُكْدِدْمُ يَو منيّته.
1.141.2اللّٰهمّ إنّا خرجنا إليك من تحت الأستار والأكنان وبعد عجيج البهائم
والولدان راغبين في رحمتك وراجين فضل نعمتك وخائفين من عذابك ونقمتك. اللّٰهمّ
فٱسقنا غيثك ولا تجعلنا من القانطين ولا تهلكنا بالسنين ولا تؤاخذنا بما
فعل السفهاء منّا يا أرحم الراحمين. اللّٰهمّ إنّا خرجنا إليك نشكو إليك ما لا
يخفى عليك حين ألجأتنا المضايق الوَعِرة وأجاءتنا المقاحط المجدبة وأعيتنا
المطالب المتعسّرة وتلاحمت علينا الفتنالمستصعبة.اللّٰهمّ
إنّانسألكألّاتردّناخائبينولات َ انبونذبانبطاختالونيمجاوانبِ لق ةعفاناَ
يقسانقسٱوكتمحروكقزروكتكربوكثيغانيلعرشنٱ ّمهّٰللا.انلامعأبانسياقتالو
ىنتجملا ةريثك ايحلا ةعقان تام دق ام اهب ييحتو تاف دق ام اهب تبنُ ت ةبشعم
ةيورُم ُ توناعيقلااهبيورُ ت سيلالب ُ
طنانوتستورقالأشجاروترخّصالأسعارإنّكعلىماتشاء قدير. 1.142ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام 1.142.1بعث رسله بما خصّهم به من وحيه وجعلهم حجّة له على خلقه لئلّا
تجب الحجّة لهم بترك الإعذار إليهم فدعاهم بلسان الصدق إلى سبيل الحقّ ألا إنّ
الله قد كشف .﴾َنيِ نَبَو ٍلاَوْمَأِب ْمُكْدِدْمُ يَو﴿ تطقس:م.اذك:ھ،ي،ش،ن١ al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
327 and locking away treasures, so that any who are stirred to repent,
to stop sinning, to listen to reminders, and to heed reproach, may do
so. God has made a man's quest for forgiveness the cord that releases
sustenance, and his mercy for the world, and he instructs, «Ask your
Lord for forgiveness, for he is ever forgiving---he will make the sky
pour rain and provide you with wealth and children.»1 May God show mercy
to the person who hastens to repent, renounces sin, and races against
death! 1.141.2 God, we have ventured out to you from under shades and
shelters, prompted by the heartrending groans of our cattle and our
children. We seek your compassion, implore your abundant blessings, and
fear your punishment and retribution. God, give us water to drink, send
us rain! Do not place us among the disheartened, do not destroy us with
years of drought,2 do not take us to task for what the foolish among us
have done,3 O most compas- sionate one! God, we have ventured out under
the sky to complain of things that are not hidden from you: rough
constrictions have made us desperate, ruinous droughts have caused us
anguish, extreme indigence has made us weak, and severe trials have
banded against us. God, we beseech you, do not turn us away with empty
hands! Do not send us back battered by grief! Do not chastise us for our
sins! Do not measure us by our deeds! God, spread over us your
rainclouds, your grace, your sustenance, and your compassion. Give us
water, beneficial, quenching, and refreshing. Let it cause to grow what
has withered and revive what has died. Give us drenching rain that
yields abun- dant, ripe fruit. Let it quench plains, make pools
overflow, urge trees to leaf and food prices to come down. Doubtless,
you are powerful over all that you will. 1.142 From an oration by ʿAlī:
1.142.1 God singled out messengers and sent them bearing his revelation,
mak- ing them his proof against the people and giving them no cause to
say he had stopped providing them with signs---thus, he continually
called them to the pathof rightwiththetongueof
truth.Hark!Godsurveilsallpeople,notbecause he is ignorant of the guarded
secrets and the innermost thoughts they conceal, 1 Qurʾan, Nūḥ71:10--12.
2 Lit. "Do not destroy us with those years." Reference to Qurʾan, Aʿrāf
7:130, where Pharaoh's people are seized with years of drought. 3
Reference to Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:155, where Moses's people beg forgiveness
for having worshipped the Golden Calf. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 328 Text
and Translation الخلق كشفة لا أنّه جَهِلَ ما أخفوه من مَصون أسرارهم ومكنون
ضمائرهم ولـكن ُ ه ُ ّيَأ﴿ مهولبيل ً لَ مَع ُنَسْحَأ ْم .ءاوَ ب باقعلاو ءازج
باوثلا نوكيف﴾ا ساَ ّرلا﴿ مهّنأ اومعز نيذلا نيأ ِ خ ُ هللا انعفر نأ انيلع اً
يغبو اًبذك اننود﴾ِمْلِعْلا يِف َنو ووضعهم وأعطانا وحرمهم وأدخلنا وأخرجهم. بنا
يستعطى الهدى ويستجلى العمى إنّ
الأئمّةمنقريشغُرسوافيهذاالبطنمنهاشملاتصلحعلىسواهمولاتصلحالولاة من غيرهم.
1.142.2منها ً لجاع اورَ ثآ ا وأخّروا آجل ً ّ نأك .اً نجآ اوبرشو اً يفاص
اوكرتو ا ي أنظر إلى فاسقهم وقد صحبالمنكرف َ أَل ِ
لبقأّمثهقئالخهبتغبُصوهقرافمهيلعتباشىّتحهقفاووهبئِسَ بوهَف مُزبدًا كالتيّار لا
يبالي ما غرّق أو كوقع النار في الهشيم لا يحفل ما حرّق. أين العقول
المستصبحة بمصابيح الهدى والأبصار اللامحة إلى منار التقوى أين القلوب التي
وُهبت للهوعوقدتعلىطاعةالله.ازدحمواعلىالح ُ طاموت َ ةّنجلاملَ
عمهلعفُرومارحلاىلعاوّحاش والنار فصرفوا عن الجنّة وجوههم وأقبلوا إلى النار
بأعمالهم دعاهم ربّهم فنفروا وول ّ وا ودعاهم الشيطان فٱستجابوا وأقبلوا.
1.143ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.143.1أيّها الناس إنّما أنتم في هذه الدنيا
غرض تنتضل فيه المنايا مع كلّ جُرعة ش َ رَق ٌ وفيكلّ أُكلةغَصَص ٌ
لاتنالونمنهانعمةإلّابفراقأخرىولايعمّرمعمّرمنكميومًامن al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 329 but because he wishes to test them, to see «who among
them performs the best deeds.»1 His reward is just recompense, and his
punishment is equitable retal- iation. Where are the people who claim
that they, not we, are the ones «firmly rooted in knowledge»?2Their
claim is false and treacherous, for God has raised us and lowered them,
favored us and deprived them, admitted us and excluded them. It is from
us that guidance is to be sought and blindness cured. The Imams of
Quraysh sprout from the seedbed of Hāshim. No others are fit for the
Imamate. No others are fit to rule.3 1.142.2 From the same oration: They
prioritized the present and put off the hereafter, rejected what is pure
and drank what is foul. I can almost see their libertines as they go
about befriend- ing sin, growing familiar and intimate with it, and
staying with it till their hair turns grey, till its dye stains their
character; then they step forward, like a foam- ing torrent that cares
not whom it drowns, or like sparks of fire falling on straw that care
not what they burn. Where are the minds illumined by lamps of guid-
ance, the eyes that looked to piety's beacon? Where are the hearts that
gave themselves to God and bound themselves to his obedience? These
people here crowded around worldly baubles and quarreled over forbidden
things. Banners for both paradise and hellfire were raised before them,
but they averted their faces from paradise and set out to earn
hellfire.When their Lord called to them, they turned and bolted. When
Satan called to them, they answered him and rushed forward. 1.143 From
an oration by ʿAlī:4 1.143.1 People! You are targets in this world at
which the fates shoot their arrows. With every sip you choke, with every
bite you gag. You obtain no bless- ing without giving up another. No one
lives for a day without erasing a day from his allotted time, he
consumes nothing without depleting his apportioned sus- 1 Qurʾan, Kahf
18:7. 2 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:7. 3 ⟨The Imamate is vested in
Quraysh⟩(al-imāmatu fī l-Quraysh) is a hadith attributed to the Prophet
Muḥammad. The Shiʿi commentator takes ʿAlī's lines about it being
confined to the clan of Hāshim, as confirmation that the Imamate is
vested solely in the Prophet's family (B 494). The Sunni
commentator---who acknowledges that if ʿAlī said this then it must be
true---takes it as an optimal, but not required, state of affairs
(Ḥ9:88). 4 In Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 98, §1.143.1 is an excerpt from a longer,
aphoristic oration titled The Inter- cessor (Wasīlah). Other excerpts
are §3.29, §3.99, §3.103, §3.175, and §3.195. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 330 Text
and Translation عمره إلّا بهدم آخر من أجله ولا تجدّد له زيادة في أكله إلّا
بنفاد ما قبلها من رزقه ولا يحيا له أثر إلّا مات له أثر ولا يتجدّد له جديد
إلّا بعد أن يخلق له جديد ولا تقوم له نابتة
إلّاوتسقطمنهمحصودة.١وقدمضتأصولنحنفروعهافمابقاءفرعبعدذهابأصله. 1.143.2منها
َ ملا اومزلٱو عدبلا اوقّتٱف ةّنس اهب كرُ ت اّلإ ةعدب تثدحأ امو هْي َ ع إنّ
عوازم الأمور أفضلها وإنّ محدثاتها ش ِ رارها. 1.144ومن كلام له عليه السلام
وقد ٱستشاره عمر بن الخطّاب في الشخوص لقتال الفرس بنفسه إنّ
هذاالأمرلميكننصرهولاخذلانهبكثرةولابقل ّ ةوهوديناللهالذيأظهرهوجنده الذي
أعدّه وأمدّه حتّى بلغ ما بلغ وطلع حيث طلع ونحن على موعود من الله والله َ رَ
خلا نم ماظِّنلا ُناكم رمألاب مِّيَقلا ُناكمو .هدنج رصانو هدعو زجنم ز يجمعه
ويضمّه فإن ٱنقطع النظام تفرّق وذهب ثمّلم يجتمع بح َ ذافيره أبدًا. والعرب
اليوم وإن كانوا قليل ً َ تْسٱو اً بطق نكف عامتجالاب نوزيزع مالسإلاب نوريثك
مهف ا برعلاب احَ ّرلا رِد وأَصْل ِ هم دونك نار الحرب فإنّك إن شخصت من هذه
الأرض ٱنتقضت عليك العرب من أطرافها وأقطارها حتّى يكون ما تدع وراءك من
العورات أهمّ إليك ممّا بين يديك. إنّ الأعاجم إن ينظروا إليك غدًا يقولوا هذا
أصل العرب فإذا ٱقتطعتموه ٱسترحتم ذ ام اّمأف كيف مهعمطو كيلع مهبَ لَكل ّدشأ
كلذ نوكيف كرت من مسير القوم إلى قتال المسلمين فإنّ الله سبحانه هو أكره
لمسيرهم منك وهو أقدر على تغيير ما يكره وأمّا ما ذ .ةنوعملاو رصنلاب لتاقن
اّ نك امّنإو ةرثكـلاب ىضم اميف لتاقن نكن مل اّنإف مهددع نم ترك
١م،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.ن،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩مخضودة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 331 tenance,nosignof
himisrevitalizedwithoutanotherdyingout,nonewclothes are given to him
except after the earlier ones have worn out, and no new shoots grow
except after the dead wood is cut down. The roots have gone, and we are
their branches---how long can a branch survive after its root has died?
1.143.2 From the same oration: No heresy is innovated without an
accepted practice being abandoned, so fear innovations and keep to the
highway. The ancient ways are best, the newfan- gled ones are evil.
1.144 From an address by ʿAlī to ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb responding to his
request for advice on whether he should lead the expedition to fight the
Persians:1 In this matter, victory or defeat will not hinge on how large
the number of troops is or how small. This is God's faith that he has
made victorious, and his army that he has prepared and equipped, until
it reached what it has, and spreadwhereithas.Weawaitthefulfilmentof
God'spledge---Godwillfulfilhis pledge and grant his victory to his
army.2 The custodian of the caliphate is like a string to beads, it
gathers them and holds them together. If the string breaks, they scatter
and disperse and are never whole again. The Arabs, though few today, are
many by virtue of Islam, and mighty because they are united. You should
be the pivot that spins them like grain in your mill. Have them brave
the fires of war instead of you. If you leave the region, the Bedouins
will swoop in from all sides and from the peripheries until the
unguarded areas you leave behind will give you far more cause for
concern than the ones that lie before you. If the Persians see you
tomorrow, they will say, "Here is the Arab's tree trunk, cut him down,
and you can sit back!" Their rage against you will become rabid, and
their hunger to get you intensify. Yes, as you say, they march to fight
the Muslims. But God detests their expedition more than you do, and he
has more power to change what he detests. As for what you say about
their num- bers, we didn't fight in the past on the strength of superior
numbers.We fought on the strength of God's support and aid. 1 Madāʾinī
(Futūḥ, lost, cited by Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd) places this address before the
Battle of Qādisiyyah in ca. 16/637, and Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 4:124) before
the Battle of Nahāwand in 21/642, both against the Persians---details
from both works are transcribed in Ḥ9:96--102; B 497. Sim- ilar context
and language in §1.132 re ʿUmar's march against the Byzantines. 2
Reference to Prophet Muḥammad's hadith (الحمد لله الذي أنجز وعده ونصر
عبده وهزم الأحزاب وحده ,)narrated in, e.g., Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, §4907.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 332 Text and
Translation 1.145ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.145.1فبعث محمّدًا بالحقّ ليخرج
عباده من عبادة الأوثان إلى عبادته ومن طاعة الشيطان إلى طاعته بقرآن قد
بيّنه وأحكمه لي َ ُ يلو هولهج ذإ مه َ ّبرُدابعلا ملع قِرّوا به بعد إذ جحدوه
وليثبتوه بعد إذ أنكروه فتجل ّ ى سبحانه لهم في كتابه من غير أن يكونوا
رأوه بما أراهم من قدرته وخوّفهم من سطوته وكيف مَح َ نم دصتحٱو تالُ ثَ ملاب
قحم نَم َق .تامِقَ ّنلاب دصتحٱ
1.145.2وإنّهسيأتيعليكممنبعديزمانليسفيهشيءأخفىمنالحقّ ولاأظهرمن الباطل ولا
أكثر من الـكذب على الله ورسوله وليس عند أهل ذلك الزمان سِلْعَة أَبْوَر ءيش
دالبلا يفالو هعضاومنعفّرُحاذإ هنمقفنأالو هتوالت ّقح يلُ ت اذإ باتكلا نم ُ تَ
لَ مَحباتكلاَذَبَندقف.ركنملانمفرعأالوفورعملانمركنأ هوتناساهحفظتهفالكتاب يومئذ
وأهله مَنفيّان طريدان وصاحبان مصطحبان في طريق واحد لا يؤويهما مُؤْوٍ. فالكتاب
وأهله في ذلك الزمان في الناس وليسا فيهم ومعهم وليسا معهم لأنّ الضلالة لا
توافق الهدى وإن ٱجتمعا وٱجتمع القوم على الفرقة وٱفترقوا عن الجماعةكأنّهم
أئمّة الكتاب وليس الكتاب إمامهم فلم يبق عندهم منه إلّا ٱسمه ولا يعرفون إلّا
خطّه وزَبْره. ومن قبل ما مَثّلوا بالصالحـين كلّ مُثْلة وسمّوا صدقهم على الله فِرْية
وجعلوا في الحسنة العقوبة١ السيّئة. وإنّما هلك من كان قبلـكم بطول آمالهم
وتغيّب آجالهم حتّى نزل بهم .ةمقنلاو ةعراقلا هعم ّلحتو ةبوتلا هنع عفرتو
ةرذعملا هنع ّدرُ ت يذلا دوعوملا 1.145.3أيّها الناس إنّه من ٱستنصح الله وُفِّق
ومن ٱتّخذ قوله دليل ً َيِه يِتَ ّلِ ل﴿ يده ا أَقْوَمُ﴾فإنّ جار الله آمِنٌ وعدوّه خائف
وإنّه لا ينبغي لمن عرف عظمة الله أن يتعظّم
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ،ونسخةفيم:بدون "الـ" ⟩عقوبة⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
333 1.145 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.145.1 God sent Muḥammad to turn
his servants from worship of idols to his worship, from obeying Satan to
his obedience. He sent him with the truth, with a clear and
comprehensive Qurʾan, so his servants may know how to recog- nize their
Lord after their earlier ignorance of him, that they may acknowledge him
after prior repudiation, and accept him after previous denial. He, the
Most Luminous,unveiledtotheminhisBookwithouttheireverseeinghim,byshow-
ing them his power, warning them of his rule, and reminding them that he
had destroyed nations with his strong reckoning and reaped lives in
harsh punish- ment. 1.145.2 After I am gone, you will see a time when
there will be nothing more suppressed than right, nothing more dominant
than wrong, and nothing more prevalent than false attributions to God
and his Messenger. No commodity will be worth less than the Book's
proper recitation or valued more than its blatant corruption. Nothing
anywhere will be less familiar than good or more promi- nent than evil.
Those who had upheld the Book will have cast it away, and those who had
memorized it will pretend they remember nothing. On that day, the Book
and its Companions will be banished into exile, two friends walking
together whom no one is willing to shelter. In that age, the Book and
its Com- panions will be among the people yet not among them, they will
be with the people yet not with them, for error is not compatible with
righteousness, even if they come together in one place. People will
unite in their dissension, they will splinter from the congregation,
they will think themselves to be imams who rule the Book rather than
realizing that the Book is the Imam who rules them. Nothing of the Book
will remain with them except its name, they will knownothingof
itbutitsscriptandscrolls.Inallthistime,theywillcontinueto inflict
torture on the pious,mislabel theirtruths as lies againstGod, andrequite
their good with evil.You should know that those who lived before you
perished because they harbored long hopes and neglected their
diminishing lifespans. The end befell them as promised---a time when all
excuses are rejected, all opportunity to repent removed, and calamity
and punishment come home to roost. 1.145.3
People!ThosewhoseekGod'scounselreceivedirection,thosewhotake his word as
guide are led to «the path that is straightest»,2 and those whom 1 From
ʿAlī's oration at Dhū Qār, just before the Battle of the Camel at Basra
in 36/656. Kulaynī, Kāfī, 8:386--391. 2 Qurʾan, Isrāʾ 17:9. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 334 Text and
Translation فإنّ رفعة الذين يعلمون ما عظمته أن يتواضعوا له وسلامة الذين
يعلمون ما قدرته أن يستسلموا له فلا تنفروا من الحقّ ن ِ فار الصحيح من
الأجرب والبارئ من ذي السقم. وٱعلموا أنكّم لن تعرفوا الرشد حتّى تعرفوا الذي
تر كه ولن تأخذوا بميثاق الكتاب حتّى تعرفوا الذي نقضه ولن تمسّكوا به حتّى
تعرفوا الذي نبذه فٱلتمسوا ذلك من عند أهله فإنّهم عيش العلم وموت الجهل هم
الذين يخـبر كم حكمهم١ عن علمهم وصمتهم عن منطقهم وظاهرهم عن باطنهم لا
يخالفون الدين ولا يختلفون فيه فهو بينهم شاهد صادق وصامت ناطق. 1.146ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام في ذ كر أهل البصرة الو لبحب هللا ىلإ ناّتُ مَ ي ال
هبحاص نود هيلع هفطعيو هل رمألا وجري امهنم دحاو ّلك ُ مَ ي دّان إليه بسبب
كلّ واحد منهما حاملُ ضَب ٍّ لصاحبه وعمّا قليل يكشف قِناعه به والله لئن أصابوا
الذي يريدون لينتزعنّ هذا نفس هذا وليأتينّ هذا على هذا. قد قامت الفئة
الباغية فأين المحتسبون قد سُنّت لهم السنن وق ُ دّم لهم الخـبر ولكلّ ضَل ّ ة
عل ّ ة ولكلّ َ ي مْدَ ّللا عمتسمك نوكأ ال هللاو ةهبش ثكان سمع الناعي ويحضر
الباكي ثمّلا يعتبر.٢ ١م،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش: ⟩حلمهم⟨.
٢ن،ش:كذا.م،ي،ھ:سقطت ⟩ثمّلايعتبر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
335 God protectsaresafe,while those whochallengehim
arefearful.Allwhorecog- nizes God's greatness should avoid
self-glorification, for real exaltation comes from humility before God,
just as the security of those who know God's power comes from their
submission to him. So shy not away from the truth, like the healthy from
the mangy, or the sound from the sick. Know this: you will not recognize
guidance until you know who has abandoned it, you will not abide by your
pledge to the Book until you know who has broken it, you will not hold
fast to it until you know who has cast it aside. Seek the truth from the
people of truth. They are the life of knowledge and the death of
ignorance. Their judg- ments reveal to you their knowledge, their
silence tells you of their reason, and their outward aspect shows you
their inner being. They never violate religion or diverge from its
laws---it is always among them as a truthful witness and a silent
speaker. 1.146 From an oration by ʿAlī about the people of Basra:1 Each
of the two wants the caliphate, he maneuvers it toward himself and away
from the other, with no rope in this affair connecting them to God, no
cord attaching them to him. Each of the two harbors the malice of a
treacherous, spiny-tailed lizard against his companion,2 and before
long, he will remove his mask. By God, if they got what they wanted,
each would assault the other, each would threaten the other's life.
Behold! The treacherous faction has risen! Are there any among you who
would seek God's reward? Clear paths have been laid out for you and you
have warnings from the past. Every error has a trig- ger, and every
breach is prompted by doubt. By God, I shall not be like the hyena
listening meekly to the sound of pebbles being thrown,3 nor yet like the
person who hears a death proclaimed and sees the mourners but pays no
heed.4 1 The "people of Basra" refers to those who fought ʿAlī in the
Battle of the Camel, outside Basra in 36/656; the oration is from the
lead-up to the battle, and "the two" refers to two of his three chief
adversaries in the battle, Ṭalḥah and Zubayr (the third was ʿĀʾishah,
who is not men- tioned), (Ḥ9:109; B 502; R 2:75). Details of the battle
in Ḥ9:111--115. 2 Lit. ⟨he carries a spiny-tailed lizard⟩(ḥāmil ḍabb), a
proverb that signifies betrayal; the spiny- tailed lizard is said to
devour its young. B 502. 3 Lit. "the one who listens to the sound of
pebbles hitting the ground" (ka-mustamiʿ al-ladm). My translation, with
the insertion of the word "hyena," is based on Ḥ9:109--110; R
2:75--76.The same simile, with an explicit mention of the word hyena, is
used in §1.6: see note there for details. Other commentators explain the
phrase non-zoologically, connecting it with events alluded to in the
next two phrases, as "the sound of hitting and weeping as a sign of
danger," B 502, and, in a similar vein, "slapping on the face and chest
as an act of mourning," ʿA 627. 4 Refers to Ṭalḥah and his companions'
killing of Ḥakīm ibn Jabalah and his followers in Basra before the
Battle of the Camel, 36/656. Ḥ9:110. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 336 Text
and Translation 1.147ومن كلام له عليه السلام قبل موته أيّها الناس كلّ ٱمرئ
لاقٍ ما يفرّ منه في فراره والأجل مَساق ُ النفس والهرب منهمُوافاتهكمٱطّردت ُ
الأيّامَأَب تاهيههءافخإاّلإهللاىبأفرمألااذهنونكمنعاهُثَ ح ْ نيذه اوميقأ .هتّنس
اوعّيضت الف دّمحمو اً ئيش هب اوكرشت ال هللاف يتّيصو اّمأ .نوزخم ملع العمودين
وأوقدوا هذين المصباحين وخَلا هَدوهجم ئرمٱ ُ ّلك لّمُح .اودُرشَ ت مل ام ّمذ مك
وخُفّف عن الجهلة. رَب ٌّ رحيم ودين قويم وإمام عليم. أنا بالأمس صاحبكم وأنا
اليوم عبرة لـكم وغدًا مفارقكم غفر الله لي ولـكم إن تثبت الوطأة في هذه
المزل ّ ة فذاك وإن باهَمو ناصغأ ءايْفَأ يف اّ نك اّنإف مدقلا ضَحدت ّ رياح وتحت
ظلّ غمام ٱضمحلّ في الجوّمُتلفِّقُها وعَفا في الأرض مَخ َ رواج اًراج تنك امّنإو .اه
ُ ّط كم بدني أيّامًا وست ُ عقبون منّي جُثّةًخلاءًساكنةًبعد حراك وصامتة بعد ن ُ
طوق ليعظكم هُدوّي وخُفوت إطراقي
وسكونأطرافيفإنّهأوعظللمعتبرينمنالمنطقالبليغوالقولالمسموع.وداعيكموداعُ ٱمرئ
مُرصد للتلاقي غدًا ترون أيّامي وي ُ كشف لـكم عن سرائري وتعرفونني بعد خلوّ
مكاني وقيام غيري مقامي. 1.148ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في الملاحم
1.148.1الف دشرلا بهاذمل اًكرتو ّيغلا كلاسم يف ١اً نعظ اًلامشو اً نيمي اوذخأو
تستعجلواماهوكائنمُرصَدولاتستبطئوامايجيءبهالغدفكممنمستعجلبماإنأدر كه ودّ أنّه
لم يدر كه وما أقرب اليوم من تباشير غد. يا قوم هذا إبّانُ ورود كلّ موعود
ودنوّ من طلعة ما لا تعرفون ألا وإنّ من أدركها منّا يسري فيها بسراج منير
ويحذو فيها على .⟨اً نعط⟩ :ھلصأو،م.اذك:ھيفةخسنو،ييفودبيو،ش،ن١ al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
337 1.147 From an address by ʿAlī just before his death:1 People! Each
person shall meet what he flees as he flees,2 for death is the place
toward which the soul is driven and running away only brings it closer.
How many days I wasted searching for the answer to this mystery, but God
would not allow it to be revealed! Far from it! A guarded piece of
knowledge! My tes- tament is this: Hold fast to God and do not assign
him partners. Hold fast to Muḥammad and do not squander his Sunnah.
Erect these two pillars, kindle these two lamps, and, as long as you do
not bolt from their stable, no blame will attach to you. Each person is
made to carry his own burden, although the ignorant masses are given a
lighter load. Your Lord is compassionate, your reli- gion is strong, and
your Imam is endowedwith knowledge.Yesterday I wasyour companion, today
I am a lesson for you to heed, and tomorrow I shall leave you.
MayGodpardonbothyouandme.If myfootregainsitsbalanceonthisslippery
ground, then that was meant to be. But if it slips, then know that the
shade of the tree of life is intermittent, winds come and go, clouds
that cast shadows are
soondispersed,andsignsarequicktovanish.ForawhileIwasyourcompanion, my
body your neighbor. Soon you will see my empty corpse, motionless after
having movement, silent after possessing speech. Let the quiet of my
pose, the closing of my eyes, the stillness of my limbs, teach you a
lesson, a lesson more effective than eloquent speech and loud words. I
bid you farewell, eager for my meeting with God! Tomorrow, when you will
look back on my life, my worth will be revealed to you. You will know me
then, when my seat is empty, and someone else has taken my place. 1.148
From an oration by ʿAlī containing accounts of epic events: 1.148.1
Those others went right and left, travelling the paths of error and for-
saking the roads of guidance. People, don't be impatient for the arrival
of an anticipated event or deem slow tomorrow's child! Many's the person
impatient
forathingthat,werehetoattainit,wouldwishheneverhad.Howcloseistoday to
the glimmer of tomorrow! This is the moment when all that is promised
begins. The dawn of a time you will not recognize is come. Hark! A man
from our family will witness this time, and he will traverse the night
with a bright lamp.3 He will follow the example of the pious, loosen
that which is bound, 1 Part of a testament---that includes
§2.23---delivered in his home in Kufa in 40/661, where he was carried
after the deathblow. Kulaynī, Kāfī, 1:299. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Jumʿah
62:8. 3 Interpreted as referring to the "Rightly Guided" Messiah from
the family of the Prophet, "Mahdī," who will come at the end of time
(Ḥ9:128--129; B 506; R 2:82). I have added the word "family" for
clarity; the Arabic is more cryptic, "a man from among us." al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 338 Text and
Translation َ يو اً بْعَش عدصيو اً ّقِر قِتعُ يو اًقْبِر اهيف ّلحيل نيـحلاصلا لاثم
شعَب صَدْعًا في سترة عن ُ يَ لّمث هرظن عبات ولو هرثأ فئاقلا رصبي ال سانلا شحَذنّ
فيها قومٌشَحْذَ القَينِ النصلَ يُجلى َ بغُ يو مهعماسم يف ريسفتلاب ىمريو مهراصبأ
ليزنتلاب قون كأس الحكمة بعد الص .حوب َ ّ 1.148.2منها حارتسٱو لجألا
قلولخٱ اذإ ىّتح رَ يِغلا اوبجوتسيو يزخلا اولمكتسيل مهب دمألا لاطو
مهسفنألذباومظعتسيملوربصلابهللاىلعاوّنميملمهبرححاقَ لنعاولاتشٱونتفلاىلإموق
في الحقّ حتّى إذا وافق وارد القضاء ٱنقطاع مدّة البلاء حملوا بصائرهم على
أسيافهم ودانوا لربّهم بأمر واعظهم. 1.148.3حتّى إذا قبض الله رسوله صل ّ مهْتَ
لاغو باقعألا ىلع موق عجر هلآو هيلع هللا ى السبل وٱتّكلوا على الولائج
ووصلوا غير الرحم وهجروا السبب الذي أمروا بمودّته ونقلوا البناءعنرَص ّ
أساسهفبنوه فيغيرموضعهمعادنكل خطيّةوأبوابكلضاربفي
غمرةقدماروافيالحـيرةوذَهَلوافيالسكرةعلىسنّةٍمنآلفرعونمنمنقطعإلىالدنيا راكن
أو مفارق للدين مباين. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
339 free those who are in bondage, sunder those who share a bond, and
unite those who are dispersed. In all this, he will remain concealed
from the people; no
trackerwilluncoverhistracesnomatterhowkeenlyhescanstheground.Then, a
group will rise with resolve sharpened like a whetted sword.1 Their eyes
will be opened by the Revealed Book, their ears will be filled with its
interpretation, and they will be served the cup of wisdom morning and
night. 1.148.2 From the same oration:
Theirtermwasprolongedsotheycouldfinishtheirshamefuldeedsanddeserve to be
struck with cataclysms.2 Then, when that era's fabric frayed,3 while one
group became comfortable with sedition and refused to impregnate war's
camel, another group endured without thinking that in laying down their
lives for truth, they were doing God a favor, or anything more that they
should. Finally, when the period of tribulation ended as ordained, they
unsheathed their swords to spread their beliefs and drew close to their
Lord at their guide's command. 1.148.3 Then, when God took back his
Messenger, one group turned on their heels, and followed roads that
tempted them into the waterless waste.4 They relied on treachery,5
cultivated other people but not the Prophet's family,6 and abandoned his
kin, whom they had been commanded to love.7 Uprooting the
edificefromitsfortifiedfoundation,theyerecteditinthewronglocation.These
people are mother lodes of every sin and entry ways for those who set
out on dangerous waters. In the manner of Pharaoh's family, they drifted
without comprehension, intoxicated and confounded. Some devoted
themselves to the world and inclined toward it, others deserted and
discarded the faith. 1 Lit. "a group will rise sharpened like a whetted
sword." I have added "with resolve" based on Ḥ9:128; alternatively,
"with minds" (B 506). 2 Interpreted as referring to an errant faction
who usurped rule (Ḥ9:130; B 507); enemies of the family of the Prophet
(R 2:82). 3 Ar. ikhlawlaqa, translation based on R 2:82; B 507. Or,
"became ready to rain down," said of a cloud, or "were razed to the
ground," said of a house. Ḥ9:130. 4 This segment may follow from the
previous one (R 2:85), or it is a new segment (B 507). Ṭabarī-Āmūlī
(Mustarshid, 401) prefaces §1.48.3 by saying that a group of people had
har- bored malice against ʿAlī since the time of the Prophet, and after
his death, their enmity came into the open. He cites the full address. 5
Ar. walāʾij, translated as "treachery" after R 2:85; or "partisans," B
508. 6 Lit. "not the family"; translation based on Ḥ9:132; B 508. 7
Interpreted as a reference to Qurʾan, Shūrā 42:23: «Say, I do not ask of
you any recompense except love for (my) kin.» Ḥ9:133; B 508. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 340 Text and
Translation 1.149ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.149.1وأستعينهعلىمَداحرالشيطانومَزاجرهوالاعتصاممنحبائلهومَخاتله.وأشهد أنّ
محمّدًاعبدهورسولهونجيبهوصفوتهلايوازىفضلهولايجـبرفقدهأضاءتبهالبلاد
بعدالضلالةالمظلمةوالجهالةالغالبةوالجفوةالجافيةوالناسيستحلّونالحريمويستذل
ّ ون الحكيم يحي َ ون على فترة ويموتون على كَفْرة. 1.149.2ثمّ إنّكم معشر
العرب أغراض بلايا قد ٱقتربت فٱتّقوا سكرات النعمة
روهظواهنينجعولطدنعةنتفلاجاجوعٱوةوشعلاماتَ قيفاوتّبثتوةمقنلاقئاوَ باورذحٱو َ
ف ىلإ لوؤَ تو ةّيفخ جرادم يف أدبت .اهاحَر رادَمو اهبطق باصتنٱو اهنيمك ظاعة
جليّة.
شِبابهاكشِبابالغلاموآثارهاكآثارالسِّلامتتوارثهاالظلمةبالعهودأوّلهمقائدلآخرهم
وآخرهممقتدٍبأوّلهميتنافسونفيدنيادنيّةويتكالبونعلىجيفةمريحةوعنقليليتبرّأ
التابع من المتبوع والقائد من المقود فيتزايلون بالبغضاء ويتلاعنون عند
اللقاء. 1.149.3دعب بولق غيزتف فوحَ ّزلا ةمصاقلاو فوجَ ّرلا ةنتفلا علاط كلذ
دعب يتأيّمث ٱستقامة وتضلّ رجال بعد سلامة وتختلف الأهواء عند هجومها وتلتبس
الآراء عند يف رُ مُ حلا مداكت اهيف نومداكتي هتمطح اهيف ىعس نمو هتمصق اهل
فرشأ نم اهموجن العان َ
ةقدٱضطربمعقودالحبلوعميوجهالأمرتغيضفيهاالحكمةوتنطقفيهاالظلمة al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
341 1.149 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1.149.1
IaskhimforaidagainstSatan'sexpulsionsandevictions.1Iseekhispro- tection
against Satan's snares and ambushes. I bear witness that Muḥammad is his
servant and messenger, his chosen one and his elect. His virtues cannot
be matched, and the heartbreak caused by his loss cannot be mended.2 The
land became illuminated with Muḥammad's light after a time of black
error, intense ignorance and uncouth ways, a time when people had made
the unlawful legal and demeaned the wise, when they were living in a
state of stupor,3 and dying as unbelievers. 1.149.2 You, Arabs, are
targets for approaching calamities, so be fearful lest your blessings
intoxicate you and beware the blows of God's punishment. Remain firm
when dust storms darken, when sedition begins to twist and turn, when
its fetus is born, and its secret made manifest, when its pivot becomes
entrenched, and its mill begins to turn. Sedition begins on hidden paths
and soon reaches the status of clear atrocity. It dances around like a
young boy, but its footprints are like wounds made by stoning. Tyrants
inherit it, one from the other, through mutual agreement, the first
among them impelling the last, and the last among them emulating the
first.They compete fiercely for this vile world and fight like dogs over
its stinking carcass. Soon the follower will disso- ciate from the one
he followed, and the driver from those he steered. They will disown one
another in enmity when they meet face to face, each will curse the
other. 1.149.3 After the first, a second seismic sedition, a crushing,
relentless sedi- tion, will march. Hearts once steadfast will falter,
men once righteous will stray, tempestuous passions will bolt in every
direction, and capricious opinions will appear in every quarter and lead
to total confusion; this sedition will crush all who rise to face it and
shatter all who attempt to withstand; people will nip and bite at one
another like a herd of wild asses; knots will be undone and direction
will be obscured; wisdom will recede and tyrants will speak out;
sedition's iron 1 The line could also be translated as, "I ask God for
aid in expelling Satan and driving him out" (R 2:85), where the subject
of the expulsion is the speaker and the object is Satan, rather than the
other way around. In either case, the speaker is asking God for aid in
withstanding Satan. Some commentaries offer both readings (B 509;
Ḥ9:138). 2 Lit. "cannot be splinted (yujbaru)," referring to the joining
of broken bones, a metaphor for coming to terms with a death or other
painful event. 3 Ar.
fatrah.Or,"livingduringtheintervalbetweenprophets."Ḥ9:139;B510;R2:85;ʿA628,citing
Qurʾan, Māʾidah 5:19. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 342 Text and
Translation وتدُق ّ أهلالبدوبم ِ
اهقيرطيفكلهيونادحُولااهرابغيفعيضياهلكلكبمهّضُرَ تواهلَحس برهت نيقيلا دَقُع
ضقنتو نيدلا رانم مِلثَتو ءامدلا طيبَع بلحتو ءاضقلاّرُ مب درت نابكرلا منها
الأكياس وتدبّرها الأرجاس مِرعادٌ مِبراق ٌ كاشفة عن ساق ت ُ قطع فيها الأرحام
ويفارَق عليها الإسلام بريئها سقيم وظاعنها مقيم. 1.149.4منها بين قتيل
مطلول وخائف مستجير يَختِلون بعَقْد الأَيمان وبغرور الإيمان فلا تكونوا أنصاب
الفتن وأعلام البدع وٱلزموا ما عقد عليه حبل الجماعة وبنيت عليه أركان
الطاعةوٱقدمواعلىاللهمظلومينولاتقدمواعليهظالمينوٱتّقوامدارجالشيطانومهابط
مكـل لّهسو ةيصعملا مكيلع مّرح نم نيعب مكّنإف مارحلا قَعُ ل مكنوطب اولخدت الو
ناودعلا سبيل الطاعة.١ 1.150ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.150.1الحمد لله
الدالّ على وجوده بخلقه وبم ُ حدَث خلقه على أزليّته وبٱشتباههم على أن لا شِبْه
له لا تستلمه المشاعر ولا تحجبه السواتر لٱفتراق الصانع والمصنوع والحادّ
والمحدود والرب ّ والمربوب الأحد لا بتأويل عدد والخالق لا بمعنى حر كة
ونصب والسميع لا بأداة والبصير لا بتفريق آلة والشاهد لا بمماسّة والبائن لا
بتراخي مسافة والظاهر لا برؤية والباطن لا بلطافة بانَ من الأشياء بالقهر
لها والقدرة عليها وبانت الأشياء منه بالخضوع له والرجوع إليه من وصفه فقد
حدّه ومن حدّه فقد عدّه ومن ال ذإ ملاع .هَزَ ّيَح دقف نيأ لاق نمو هفصوتسٱ دقف
فيك لاق نمو هَ لَزَأ لطبأ دقف هّدع معلوم ورب ّ إذ لا مربوب وقادر إذ لا
مقدور. ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،وأضيفتفيهامشھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: سقطت
⟩وسهّللـكمسبيلالطاعة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
343 bridle will bruise the Bedouins and its looming torso will crush
them; individ- uals will be lost in its dust and riders will perish in
its path; it will come bearing bitter fate, and when milked, it will
yield fresh blood; it will extinguish the bea- con of faith, and undo
the bonds of certainty; the intelligent will flee, while the degenerate
will be mesmerized; it will hurl bolts of thunder and lightning and bare
its shanks;1 kinship ties will be cut, and Islam will be forsaken; the
unscathed will be afflicted, and the shirker will not escape. 1.149.4
From the same oration: Some will be killed, their blood unavenged,
others, desperately afraid, will seek asylum, and people everywhere will
be taken in by false oaths and the pretense of faith. Be watchful, all
of you, that you don't turn into temples of sedition or waymarks of
heresy. Stay with the true belief to which the community's rope is
bound, and on which the pillars of obedience are raised. Go forward to
God as victims of oppression, not inflictors. Beware the ways of Satan,
beware the abyssof
rancor.Don'tfillyourstomachswithunlawfulmorsels.Remember!You are watched
by the one who has forbidden sin and smoothed the path of obe- dience.
1.150 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 1.150.1 Praise God, who demonstrated his
existence through his creatures, his eternity through their temporality,
and his singularity through their resem- blance to one another. But
although veils cannot conceal him, neither can senses grasp him, for the
craftsman and the handicraft, the delimiter and the delimited, the
master and the servant, are mutually distinct. He is one but not in the
sense of numbers, the creator but not through movement and effort, the
hearer but not with an appendage, the seer but not through an organ, the
witness but not by being present, the separate but not through distance,
the manifest but not through vision, and the hidden but not because he
is trans- parent. He is separate from all things, for he subjugates and
wields power over them, and all things are separate from him, for they
bow and return to him. To describe him is to circumscribe him, to
circumscribe him is to quantify him, and to quantify him is to deny his
eternity. To ask "How?" is to seek a descrip- tion of him, to ask
"Where?" is to confine him. He was knowledgeable when there was nothing
to be known, Lord when there was no one to be Lord over, and powerful
when there was nothing over which to wield power. 1 Ar. kāshifatun ʿan
sāq, echoes Qurʾan, Qalam 68:42; it connotes severe hardship (Ḥ9:145),
or girding for an attack (B 511). 2 From the beginning of ʿAlī's
caliphate in Medina, in 35/656. Ḥ9:153; R 2:91; B 515. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 344 Text and
Translation 1.150.2منها قد طلع طالع ولمع لامع ولاح لائح وٱعتدل مائل
وٱستبدل الله بقوم قومًا وبيوم يومًا هدابع ىلع هؤافرعو هقلخ ىلع هللا ماّوق
ةّمئألا امّنإو رطملا بِدجُملا راظتنٱ رَ يِغلا انرظتنٱو لا يدخل الجنّة إلّا من
عرفهم وعرفوه ولا يدخل النار إلّا من أنكرهم وأنكروه. إنّ الله خص ّ كم
بالإسلام وٱستخصلـكم له وذلك لأنّه ٱسم سلامة وجِماع كرامة ٱصطفى الله تعالى
منهجه وبي ّ ن حججه من ظاهر علم وباطن حكم١ لا تفنى غرائبه ولا تنقضي
عجائبه فيه مرابيع النعم ومصابيح الظلم لا تفتح الخـيرات إلّا بمفاتحه ولا
تكشف الظلمات إلّا بمصابحه قد أحمى حماه وأرعى مرعاه فيه شفاء المشتفي
وكفاية المكتفي. 1.151ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.151.1وهو في مُهلة من الله
يهوي مع الغافلين ويغدو مع المذنبين بلا سبيل قاصد ولا إمام قائد.
1.151.2منها حتّى إذا كَشف لهم عن جزاء معصيتهم وٱستخرجهم من جلابيب غفلتهم
ٱستقبلوا مدبرًا وٱستدبروا مقبل ً ّ نإف .مهرَطَو نم اوضق امب الو مهتبِ لَط نم
اوكردأ امب اوعفتني ملف ا ي أحّذر كم ونفسي هذه المنزلة فلينتفع ٱمرؤ بنفسه
فإنّما البصير من سمع فتفكّر ونظر فأبصر يواغملا يف لالضلاو يواهملا يف ةعْرَ
ّصلا هيف بّنجتي اً حضاو اًدَدَج كلسّمث ربعلاب عفتنٱو ولا يعين على نفسه الغواة
بتعسّف في حقّ أو تحريف في نطق أو تخوّف من صدق ١ن،م،ش،ھ:كذا.ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:
⟩حلم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
345 1.150.2 From the same oration: What was going to rise has risen,
what was going to shine forth has shone, what was going to emerge has
emerged, and what had listed to one side has straightened. God has
replaced one group with another, one day with another, a change we
awaited as the drought-stricken wait for rain. Hear me! The Imam is
God's caretaker over his creatures and the leader he has appointed over
his servants: no one will enter paradise except those he recognizes and
who rec- ognize him, no one will enter hellfire except those he denies
and who deny him.1 God has privileged and blessed you with Islam: its
name denotes safety and it is the aggregate of honor; its way is chosen
by God, and its proofs are explained by him, both its manifest knowledge
and its concealed wis- dom;2 its wonders never cease, its marvels never
end; it boasts verdant bless- ings and lamps that dispel darkness; its
keys open goodness, its lamps dispel the dark; God has strengthened its
fortifications and permitted grazing in its pastures; it heals those who
seek healing and suffices those who seek suffi- ciency. 1.151 From an
oration by ʿAlī:3 1.151.1 Such men, during the respite granted them by
God, fall into error with the heedless, and set out every morning with
sinners, with no path to follow, no Imam to guide them. 1.151.2 From the
same oration: Then, when God reveals the payback for their disobedience
and tears off their garments of negligence, they must face what they
ignored and leave what they loved, benefitting not at all from desires
they slaked or passions they gratified. I warn you---and myself---don't
reach this station! Let each man save himself! The discerning listens
and contemplates, he sees and understands, he learns from exemplary
lessons, follows the clear road, and avoids twisting ravines and
perilous canyons, he does not give ammunition to his deceivers by
dismiss- 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:46--49. The word ʿurafāʾ
(leaders) is explained through the root meaning of ʿarafa (to
recognize); the name of the Surah---Aʿrāf---is also derived from the
same root, "ʿ-R-F." 2 "Manifest knowledge and concealed wisdom" refer to
the Qurʾan. Ḥ9:156; R 2:91; B 517. 3 Delivered en route from Medina to
Basra in 36/656, before the Battle of the Camel (Ḥ9:162; B 521).
§1.151.1 refers to individuals who refused to support ʿAlī and sat out
the Battle of the Camel (R 2:92), or to all errant humans (Ḥ9:157; B
518). §1.151.3 refers to the leaders in the Battle of the Camel,
ʿĀʾishah, Ṭalḥah, and Zubayr (Ḥ9:161--162; B 521). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 346 Text
and Translation فأَفِق ْ
أيّهاالسامعمنسكرتكوٱستيقظمنغفلتكوٱختصرمنعجلتكوأَنْعِمالفكرفيما
جاءكعلىلسانالنبيّالأمّيّصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهممّالابدّمنهولامحيصعنهوخال ِ ف ْ مَن
خال َ ف َ ذلك إلى غيره ودَعْهُوما رضي لنفسه وضَعْ فخرك وٱحطط كبرك وٱذ كر قبرك
فإنّ عليه ممرّك وكما ت َ دين ت ُ دان وكما تزرع تحصد وما قدّمت اليوم ت َ
قْدَمُعليه غدًا فٱمهد ل ِ ُ ئِّبَ نُ ي اَلَو﴿ لفاغلا اهّيأ َ ّدِجلا َ ّدِجلاو عمتسملا
اهّيأَرذحلاَرذحلاف كمويل مّدقو كمَدَق كَ مِثْلُ خَبِيرٍ﴾. 1.151.3إنّ منعزائم١اللهفيالذ
كرالحكيمالتيعليهايثيبويعاقبولهايرضىويسخط نمةلصخبهّبراً
يقالايندلانمجرخينأهلعفصلخأوهسفندهجأنإواًدبععفنيالهّنأ هذه الخصال لم يتب
منها أن يشرك بالله فيما ٱفترض عليه من عبادته أو يشفي غيظه بهلاك نفس٢ أو
يقرّبأمرٍفعله غيره أو يستنجح حاجة إلى الناس بإظهار بدعة في دينه أو يلقى
الناس بوجهين أو يمشي فيهم بلسانين. اعقل ذلك فإنّ المثل دليل على شِبْهه إنّ
البهائم همّها بطونها وإنّ السباع همّها العدوان على غيرها وإنّ النساء همّهنّ
زينة الحياة الدنيا والفساد فيها إنّ المؤمنين مستكينون إنّ المؤمنين مشفقون
إنّ المؤمنين خائفون. 1.152ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.وأصلم،ونسخةفيش: ⟩كرائم⟨. ٢ش،ن،ھ:كذا. م،ي: ⟩نفسه⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
347 ing truth, distorting speech, or dodging battle.1 Emerge, O
listener, from your intoxication, awake from your slumber, and temper
your haste for worldly gain! Ponder the warning that has come to you on
the Meccan Prophet's tongue about the inexorable, inescapable end.2
Resist anyone who resists this view, reject him and his errant ways.
Discard your pride, abandon your arrogance, and remember the grave, for
your path leads straight to it. As you treat others, so shall you be
treated, as you sow, so shall you reap, the deeds you perform today
shall you come to in the morrow---prepare for your arrival and provide
for that day. Beware, O listener, beware! Heed, reckless one, heed!
Indeed, «no one informs you as well as one who is fully aware.»3 1.151.3
One of the resolutions that God has transcribed in the Wise Remem-
brance4---and these are the resolutions on whose basis he rewards or
punishes, accepts or rebukes---is that he will not show favor to the man
who leaves the world to meet him, even one who has expended effort and
performed sincere acts, if he comes unrepentant with the following sins:
having assigned partners to God in worship, slaked his rage with murder,
accused someone of a crime another has committed, sought gain by
innovating a heresy, or displayed two faces and spoken with two tongues.
Understand this, for one example sheds light on all similar cases.
Cattle care only about their stomachs, predators care only about
attacking, and women care only about worldly adornments and sowing
discord.5 Believers are humble, believers are compassionate, believers
fear God! 1.152 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1 Ar. aw takhawwufin min ṣidq:
ṣidq---translated here as "battle"---means "truth" in common parlance,
but in the context of battle, it denotes "courage in fighting for the
truth." Discussion and examples in Qutbuddin, Arabic Oration, 318--320.
2 The word ummī in the Qurʾan's designation of Muḥammad as "the ummī
Prophet" (al-nabī al-ummī, Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:157) has differing
interpretations. One is "the Meccan Prophet," as I have translated here
(following R 3:248, commentary on §3.41), which signals Muḥammad's birth
affiliation to "the mother of all cities" (Umm al-qurā), Mecca. Other
interpretations for ummī are "unlettered," or "belonging to a community
(ummah)" of earlier prophets. 3 Qurʾan, Fāṭir 35:14. 4 The Wise
Remembrance (al-Dhikr al-ḥakīm) is the Qurʾan. 5 The reference about
women is to ʿĀʾishah, who was at the head of the coalition challenging
ʿAlī's caliphate. See also text and note at §1.154.1, §2.1. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 348 Text and
Translation 1.152.1وناظر ُقلب اللبيب به يبصر أمده ويعرف غَوره ونَجْده داعٍ
دعا وراعٍ رعا
فٱستجيبواللداعيوٱتّبعواالراعيقدخاضوابحارالفتنوأخذوابالبدعدونالسننوأَرَزَ
المؤمنون ونطق الضال ّ ون المكذّبون. 1.152.2نحن الشعار والأصحاب والخزنة
والأبواب لا تؤتى البيوت إلّا من أبوابها فمن .اً قراس يّمس اهباوبأ ريغ نم
اهاتأ منها فيهم كرائم الإيمان١ وهم كنوز الرحمان إن نطقوا صدقوا وإن صمتوا
لم ي ُ سب َ قوا. فلي َ صدُق رائد أهله وليحضر عقله وليكن من أبناء الآخرة
فإنّه منها قدم وإليها ينقلب فالناظر بالقلب العامل بالبصر يكون مبتدأ عمله
أن يعلم أعمله عليه أم له فإن كان له مضى فيه وإن كان عليه وقف عنه وإنّ
العامل بغير علم كالسابل٢ على غير طريق فلا يزيده بعده عن الطريق إلّا بعدًا
من حاجته والعامل بالعلم كالسائر على الطريق الواضح فلينظر ناظر امو هنطاب
باط هرهاظ باط امف هلاثم ىلع اً نطاب رهاظ ّلكل ّنأ ملعٱو عجار مأ وه رئاسأ
خبث ظاهره خبث باطنه وقد قال الرسول الصادق صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ⟩إنّ الله
يحب ّ العبد ويبغض عمله ويحب ّ العمل ويبغض ب َ دَنه⟨. وٱعلم أنّ كلّ عمل نبات
وكلّ نبات لا غنى به عن الماء والمياه مختلفة فما طاب سقيه طاب غرسه وحَل َ ت
ْ ثمرته وما خبث سقيه خبث غرسه وأمرّت ثمرته. ١م،ي،ونسخةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ:
⟩القرآن⟨. ٢م،ي:كذا.ش،ن،ھ: ⟩كالساير⟨. ومصحّحةفيي،ھ: ⟩كالسايل⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
349 1.152.1 An intelligent person possesses a keen heart with which he
perceives his goal and distinguishes high ground from low. The caller
has called, and the shepherd has gathered his herd, so answer the caller
and follow the shep- herd! Those people plunged into seas of revolt and
followed heretical innova- tions instead of established practice.
Believers cowered, while those who had strayed, who were calling the
truth a lie, spoke loudly. 1.152.2 We are its vestments and companions,
its vault-keepers and doors, and homes should be entered only through
doors---whoever enters any other way will be called a thief!1 From the
same oration: We are religion's jewels, the Merciful Lord's treasure;
when we speak, we speak the truth, when we stay silent, no one outpaces
us.2 Let the scout be true to his people and stay alert!3 Let him be a
child of the hereafter from where he has come and to where he will
return!The person who perceives with his heart and would act with
discernment should first determine, will his deed count for or against
him? If it will count for him, he should proceed, if it will count
against him, he should desist. A person who acts without knowledge is
like someone who loses his way---the further he strays from the road,
the further he strays from his goal; the person who acts with knowledge
is like someone who travels on the clear road. Let each individual
assess for himself, should he go forward, or should he turn back? Know
that every outward aspect has a correspond- ing inner one---whatever is
pure in its outward aspect is pure in its inner one, and whatever is
foul in its outward aspect is foul in its inner one. The truthful
messenger has said, ⟨God can love a servant and yet hate his deeds or
love his deeds and yet hate his being⟩. Know further that every deed is
a plant, every plant requires water, and all water is not the same. A
plant watered with pure water yields pure shoots and sweet fruit. A
plant watered with foul water yields foul shoots and bitter fruit. 1
"It" refers to the Imamate. "We" (here and in the next section) refers
to the family of the Prophet. The simile of the "door" echoes the
Prophet's hadith, ⟨I am the city of knowledge and ʿAlī is its
gateway⟩and the Qurʾan verse, «Enter homes through their doorways and
fear God» (Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:189). "Vestments" (shiʿār), more
specifically, "inner garments," denotes closeness to the Prophet.
Ḥ9:165--166, 176; B 522--523; R 2:94. See twenty-four hadiths in praise
of ʿAlī, and their references, in Ḥ9:166--175. 2 "No one outpaces us
(lam yusbaqū)" means that (1) our silence is not due to incapacity, we
are still the incumbents of the Imamate; and/or (2) no one dares to
speak until we do; they stay silent out of respect and awe. Ḥ9:177. 3
Referstotheproverb,⟨Thescoutdoesnotlietohispeople⟩(الرائدلايكذبأهله
.)Ḥ9:177;B523. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 350 Text and
Translation 1.153ومن خطبة له عليه السلام يذ شاّفـُ خلا ةقلخ عيدب اهيف رك
1.153.1الحمد لله الذي ٱنحسرت الأوصاف عن كنه معرفته وردعت عظمته العقول
فلم تجد مَساغًا إلى بلوغ غاية ملـكوته هو الله الحقّ المبين أحقّ وأبين ممّا
ترى العيون لم ً لَ ّثمم نوكيف ريدقتب ماهوألا هيلع عقت ملو اً ه َ ّبشم
نوكيف ديدحتب لوقعلا هغلبت ا خلق الخلق
علىغيرتمثيلولامشورةمشيرولامعونةمعينفتمّخلقهبأمرهوأذعنلطاعتهفأجاب ولم
يدافع وٱنقاد ولم ينازع. 1.153.2ومن لطائف صنعته وعجائب خلقته ما أرانا من
غوامض الحكمة في هذه الخفافيش التي يقبضها الضياء الباسط لكلّ شيء ويبسطها
الظلام القابض لكلّ حيّ وكيف عَشِي َ ت ْ أعينها عن أن تستمدّ من الشمس المضيئة
نورًا تهتدي به في مذاهبها وتتّصل بعلانية برهان الشمس إلى معارفها وردعها
بتلألؤ ضيائها عن المضيّ في سُب ُ َ لَ ب يف باهذلا نع اهنماكم يف اه َ ّنَكَأو
اهقارشإ تاح ج ٱئتلاقها فهي مُسدلة الجفون اهراصبأ ّدرَ ي الف اهقازرأ سامتلٱ
يف هب ّلدتست اًجارس ليللا ةلعاجو اهقادِح ىلع راهنلاب إسداف ُ
ظلمتهولاتمتنعمنالم ُ ضيّ فيهلغسقدُجُنّتهفإذاألقتالشمسقناعهاوبدت أوضاح نهارها
ودخل من إشراق نورها على الضِّباب في وِجارها أطبقت الأجفان على مَآقيها وتبلّغت
بما ٱكتسبته من المعاش في ظلم ليلها. فسبحان من جعل الليل لها ىلإ ةجاحلا
دنع اهب جرعت اهمْحَل نم ةحنجأ اهل لعجو اًرارقو اً نكس راهنلاو اًشاعمو اًراهن
الطيران كأنّها شَظايا الآذان غير ذوات ريش ولا ق َ صَب إلّا أنّك ترى مواضع
العروق اهيلإ ئجال اهب قصال اهدلوو ريطت .القثيف اظلغي ملو اّقشنيف اّقري اّ
مل ناحانج اًمالعأ ةنّيب يقع إذا وقعت ويرتفع إذا ٱرتفعت لا يفارقها حتّى تشتدّ
أركانه ويحمله للنهوض جناحه ويعرف مذاهب عيشه ومصالح نفسه. فسبحان الباري
لكلّ شيء على غير مثال خلا من غيره. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
351 1.153 From an oration by ʿAlī in which he describes the wondrous
creation of the bat: 1.153.1 Praise God! Descriptions are too feeble to
plumb his core, for his maj- esty curbs intellects from reaching the
limits of his kingdom. He is God, real and clear, too real, too clear,
for eyes to see. Intellects cannot delineate his boundaries---he can
never be likened to another. Imaginations cannot cap- ture him---he can
never be pictured as another. He created without paradigm, advice, or
help. His command brought forth a perfect creation, which bowed to him
in obedience, responded without defiance, and submitted without fight-
ing. 1.153.2 Among the sublimities of his craftsmanship and the marvels
of his creation are the profound mysteries he has shown us in these
bats. They are constricted by light which causes other creatures to
emerge, and drawn out by darkness, which causes other beings to seek
shelter. See how he caused their eyes to be dazzled by the sun's
brilliance, instead of using the sun to guide their movements, or
harnessing its light to visit their haunts. See how he curbed them with
the sun's very brilliance from flitting about in its majestic gleams,
how he restrained them in their caverns from setting out in its intense
glare. They let their eyelids droop during the day over their pupils and
use the night as a lamp to guide them toward sustenance. The darkening
gloom does not impede their sight, its black obscurity does not hinder
their movement. But as the sun removes its veil and the morning
glimmers, as its bright rays pene- trate the lizard in its hole, the
bats shut their eyelids and settle down with the food they were able to
collect in the shadows of the night. Glory to him who made night for
them as daylight hours, as the time to gather food, and day- light hours
the time for rest and tranquility! Glory to him who created their wings
from flesh! Wings they use to propel themselves in flight, that look
like bow-shaped ears and have no feathers or quills, but in which you
can see their clearly marked fingers;1 two wings, not so thin as to
tear, but not so thick either that they would weigh down their bodies.
When bats fly, their pups cling to them for shelter, swooping and rising
with their mothers when their moth- ers swoop and rise. They do not fly
off until their limbs are strong, and their wings can support them,
until they can find their own way to food and safety. Glory to the
creator of all things, who created without following another's paradigm!
1 Ar. ʿurūq (sing. ʿirq), lit. "roots" or "veins," translated as
"fingers" based on modern zoology. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 352 Text and
Translation 1.154ومن كلام له عليه السلام خاطب به أهل البصرة على جهة
ٱقتصاص الملاحم 1.154.1فمن ٱستطاع عند ذلك أن يعتقل نفسه على الله فليفعل.
وإن أطعتموني فإن ّ ي حاملـكم إن شاء الله على سبيل الجنّة وإن كان ذا مشقّة
شديدة ومَذاقة مَريرة. وأمّا ْ يَقلا لَجْرِمك اهردص يف الَ غ ٌنْغِضو ءاسنلا يأر
اهكردأف ةنالف ن ولو دعيت ْ لتنال من غيري ما أتت إليّ لم تفعل ولها
بعدُحرمتُها الأولى والحساب على الله. 1.154.2منه سبيل أبلج المنهاج أنور
السراج فبالإيمان ي ُ ستدلّ على الصالحات وبالصالحات يستدلّ على الإيمان
وبالإيمان يعمر العلم وبالعلم يرهب الموت وبالموت تختم الدنيا وبالدنيا
تحرز الآخرة. وإنّ الخلق لا مَقْصَر لهم عن القيامة مُرقِلين في مِضمارها إلى
الغاية القصوى. 1.154.3منه قد شخصوا من مستقرّ الأجداث وصاروا إلى مصاير
الغايات لكلّ دار أهلها لا ُ لُ خَلركنملانعيهنلاوفورعملابرمألا
ّنإواهنعنولقنيالواهبنولدبتسي قانمنخلقالله سبحانه وإنّهما لا يقرّبان من أجل
ولا ينقصان من رزق. وعليكم بكتاب الله فإنّه الحبل المتين والنور المبين
والشفاء النافع والرِّي ّ الناقع والعصمة للمتمسّك والنجاة للمتعلّق لا ي َ عْوَجّ
في ُ قام ولا يزيغ فيستعتب ولا يُخلقهكثرة الردّ وولوج السمع من قال به صدق
ومن عمل به سبق. 1.154.4وقام إليه رجل فقال يا أمير المؤمنين أخبرنا عن
الفتنة وهل سألت عنها رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فقال عليه السلام
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
353 1.154 From an address by ʿAlī to the people of Basra, foretelling
calamities:1 1.154.1 Atthattime,whoeverisabletobindhimself
totallytoGodshoulddoso. If
youobeyme,Ishall,Godwilling,driveyouonthepathtothecelestialgarden, even
when it brings severe hardships and bitter trials. As for that woman,
the suppositions of women overtook her and malice simmered in her breast
like a dyer's boiling cauldron.2 If she had been invited to malign
anyone else with the aggression she used against me, she would not have
done so. No matter. Let her retain her state of spousal sanctity.3 Her
reckoning is in God's hands. 1.154.2 From the same address: It is a road
whose track is clear and whose lamp is bright. Through faith you are
guided to deeds, through deeds you are guided to faith. Through faith
you enliven knowledge, through knowledge you fear death, through death
your life in the world ends, and through life in the world you attain
the hereafter. There is no place where you can hide from the
resurrection. In its arena, all race to the final post. 1.154.3 Emerging
from the repose of graves, they set off for their destined end;4 each
abode receives its residents, and they are never removed from it, or
given another, forever after. Commanding good and forbidding evil are
traits of divinity, they will not hasten your death or decrease your
sustenance. Hold fast to God's Book: it is the strong rope, the clear
light, the effectual cure, the quencher of thirst, the adherent's
protection, and the devotee's salvation; it never becomes crooked and
needs straightening, or deviates and needs to be forced back; it is not
worn out by the tongue's recitation or frayed by the ear's
audition---whoever affirms it speaks the truth, whoever acts upon it
wins. 1.154.4 At that time, a man stood up and said, "Commander of the
Faithful, tell us about this sedition---did you ask God's Messenger
about it?" and ʿAlī responded: 1 In Basra, immediately after the Battle
of the Camel in 36/656 (Ṭūsī,Talkhīṣal-Shāfī, vol. 1 pt. 2, 274--275).
§1.154.2 and §1.154.4 are cited as answers given during an oration in
the mosque in Basra, a few days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656
(Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 224--225, 230). Other parts of the same oration in
ibid., 221--233, are listed in note to §1.23. Also, §1.154.2 is similar
to §1.103.1. 2 Refers to ʿĀʾishah, who brought an army to fight ʿAlī in
the Battle of the Camel outside Basra in 36/656. Details of her
conflicts with ʿAlī and Fāṭimah in Ḥ9:190--200; B 527. "Dyer's boiling
cauldron" after R 2:101; or, "a cauldron made by a blacksmith" (Ḥ9:189).
3 As the Prophet Muḥammad's wife. B 527; Ḥ9:199. 4 I.e., paradise or
hellfire. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 354 Text and
Translation بِسَحَأ ٓمٓلا﴿ هلوق هناحبس هللا لزنأ اّ مل ساَ ّنلا َ َرْتُ ي نَأ ُ
كُوا أَن ي َ ُ ي اَل ْمُهَو اَ ّنَمآ اوُ لوُق ﴾َنوُ نَ تْف علمت أنّ الفتنة لا تنزل بنا
ورسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بين أظهرنا فقلت يا رسول الله ما هذه
الفتنة التي أخبرك الله بها فقال ⟩يا عليّإنّ أمّتي سيفتنون من بعدي⟨فقلت يا
رسول الله أوليس قد قلت لي يوم أُحُد حيث ٱستشهد من ٱستشهد من المسلمين وحيزت
عنّي الشهادة فشقّ ذلك عليّ فقلت لي أَبْشِرْ فإنّ الشهادة من ورائك فقال لي إنّ ذلك
لـكذلك فكيف صبرك إذًا فقلت يا رسول الله ليس هذا من مواطن الصبر ولـكن من
مواطن البشرى والشكر وقال ⟩يا عليّ إنّ القوم سيفتنون بأموالهم ويمنّون بدينهم
على ربّهم ويتمنّون رحمته ويأمنون سطوته ويستحلّون حرامه بالشبهات الكاذبة
والأهواء الساهية فيستحلّون الخمر بالنبيذ والسحت بالهديّة والربا
بالبيع⟨فقلت يا رسول الله فبأي ّ المنازل أُنزلهم عند ذلك أبمنزلة رِدّة أم
بمنزلة فتنة فقال بمنزلة فتنة. 1.155ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.155.1الحمدللهالذيجعلالحمدمفتاحًالذ ً ليلدوهلضفنمديزمللاً ببسوهرك
اعلىآلائه ِ يْرَ جك نيقابلاب يرجي رهدلا ّنإ هللا دابع .هتمظعو ه بالماضين
لا يعود ما قد ول ّ ى منه ولا يبقى سرمدًا ما فيه. آخر فِعالهكأوّله
متسابقةٌأمورُه متظاهرة أعلامه فكأنّكم بالساعة تحدو كم حَدْوَ الزاجر بشَوله. فمن
شغل نفسه بغير نفسه تحـيّر في الظلمات وٱرتبك في al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 355 When the Almighty revealed the verses, «Alif Lām Mīm. Do
people think they can claim, "we believe," without being tested»?1 I
knew that sedition would not befall us while the Messenger remained
among us, so I asked, "Messen- ger of God, what is this sedition that
God has informed you about and when will it come to pass?" He replied,
⟨ʿAlī, my community will be thrown into tur- moil when I die.⟩I probed,
"Messenger of God, did you not say to me at the Battle of Uḥud---when
some were martyred and I was sad that I was denied the honor---'Be
happy, for you shall win martyrdom too'?" He said, "Yes, that is
correct. What will your acceptance look like then?" and I replied,
"Messen- ger of God, it will not be an occasion for acceptance, but for
immense joy and gratitude!" The Prophet also told me, ⟨ʿAlī, people will
be tested with regard to wealth---thinking their support of Islam a
favor to their Lord,2 they will feel entitled to his mercy and believe
themselves secure against his punishment. By raising false suspicions
and wayward passions, they will legalize the things he has
forbidden---they will drink wine, calling it date juice, take bribes,
calling it gift-giving, and practice usury, calling it trade.⟩I asked
him then, "Messenger of God, which category will they fall in at that
time, apostasy or sedition?" and he answered, "Sedition." 1.155 From an
oration by ʿAlī:3 1.155.1 Praise God, who made praise the key to his
remembrance,4 the means to increasing his bounty,5 and a sign of his
blessings and glory. Servants of God! Time's river flows on with those
who are alive, just as it swept away those who are now gone. The part
that has gone will never return, and the part that is
presentwillnotremain.Thelastof
itsactionsarelikethefirst,itsaffairsoutrace each other, its banners
reinforce each other, and the final hour pushes you for- ward as a rough
herdsman drives his thirsty camels to the waterhole. Whoever occupies
himself with anything other than his soul stumbles in darkness and 1
Qurʾan, ʿAnkabūt 29:1--2. The first verse---«Alif Lām Mīm»---consists of
three letters of the Arabic alphabet that many exegetes explain as an
allusion to angels or prophets by whom God swears an oath, after which
he makes the declaration that follows in the second verse. 2 Refers to
Qurʾan, Ḥujurāt 49:17. 3 Oration delivered in the mosque of Basra, a few
days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
233--235). 4 "The Remembrance (Dhikr)" is also one of the names of the
Qurʾan, the first Surah of which begins, "Praise God, Lord of all the
worlds," Qurʾan, Ḥamd/Fātiḥah 1:1. Ḥ9:210; R 2:106--107. 5 The Arabic
word for "praise," ḥamd, also includes the meaning of "thanks," and this
is what is intended here, as a reference to the Qurʾanic verse, "If you
give thanks, we shall increase your blessings." Qurʾan, Ibrāhīm 14:7; B
531; Ḥ9:211; R 2:107. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 356 Text and
Translation رانلاونيقباسلاةياغةّنجلافهلامعأئّيسهلتنّ
يزوهنايغطيفهنيطايشهبتّدَموتاكلهلا غاية المفرطين اعلموا عباد الله أنّ التقوى
دار حصن عزيز والفجور دار حصن ذليل لا يمنع أهله ولا يحرز من لجأ إليه ألا
وبالتقوى ت ُ قطع حُمة الخطايا وباليقين تدرك الغاية القصوى. 1.155.2عباد
الله الله َالله َفي أعزّ الأنفس عليكم وأحبّها إليكم فإنّ الله قد أوضح سبيل
الحقّ وأنار طرقه فشقوة لازمة أو سعادة دائمة فتزوّدوا في أيّام الفناء لأيّام
البقاء فقد دللتم على الزاد وأمرتم بالظعن وحثثتم على المسير فإنّما أنتم
كركب وُقوف لا تدرون متى تؤمرون بالسير١ ألا فما يصنع بالدنيا مَن خُل ِ قَ
للآخرة وما يصنع بالمال من عمّا قليل ي ُ سلبه وتبقى عليه تَب ِ عَت ُ ه
وحسابه عباد الله إنّه ليس لما وعد الله من الخـير مَتْرَك ولا فيما
نهىعنهمنالشرّمَرْغَبعباداللهٱحذروايومًاتفحصفيهالأعمالويكثرفيهالزلزال وتشيب
فيه الأطفال. اعلموا عباد الله أنّ عليكم رَصَدًا من أنفسكم وعيونًا من جوارحكم
وحُفّاظصدقيحفظونأعمالـكموعددأنفاسكملاتستر كممنهمظلمةليلداج ٍ ولاي ُ كِنّكم
منهم باب ذو رِتاج. وإنّ غدًا من اليوم قريب يذهب اليوم بما فيه ويجيء الغد
لاحقًا به فكأنّ كلّ ٱمرئ منكم قد بلغ من الأرض منزل وحدته ومخط ّ حفرته فياله
من بيت وحدة ومنزل وحشة ومَفْر َ د غربة وكأنّ الصيحة قد أتتكم والساعة قد
غشيتكم وبرزتم
لفصلالقضاءقدزاحتعنكمالأباطيلوٱضمحلّتعنكمالعللوٱستحقّتبكمالحقائق .رُذُ ّنلاب
اوعفتنٱو رَ يِغلاب اوربتعٱو ربعلاب اوظعّتٱف اهرداصم رومألا مكب تردصو
1.156ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩المسير⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
357 is ensnared in catastrophe, he is incited by his devils to persist
in depravity and to pile on the evil deeds they adorn in his eyes.
Paradise is the destination of those who are quick to believe, hellfire
the destination of malefactors. Servants of God! Know that piety's
fortress is mighty, while immorality's citadel is easily breached---it
neither protects its people nor shields those who seek its refuge.
Listen to me! Piety heals the scorpion-sting of sin. Certainty carries
you to the ultimate goal. 1.155.2 Servants of God! Fear God and look to
the direction of your own soul, the one most precious to you and
beloved, for God has shown you the path of truth and illumined its
course: the end is either unshakable wretchedness, or eternal bliss.
Stock up in the days that will expire for the days that will endure, for
you have been shown where to find provisions, commanded to load up, and
encouraged to set out. Yours is a halted caravan unsure of when it will
be instructed to resume. Harken and listen! What does someone created
for the hereafter want with this world? What does someone whose
possessions
willsoonbeplundered---indeed,whileitsburdenandreckoningwillremain---
want with gold and livestock?1 Servants of God! There is no reason you
should refrain from the good for which God has promised reward or seek
the evils he has forbidden! Servants of God! Fear the day when deeds
will be exam- ined, earthquakes will intensify, and infants' locks will
turn white. Servants of God, know this: Your own self surveils you, your
own limbs spy on you, and truthful chroniclers record your deeds and
count your breaths. Dark nights cannot veil you from them, nor locked
doors keep you concealed. Tomorrow is close to today. Today, with all
that is in it, will soon pass, and tomorrow will follow. It is as though
each one of you has already reached his place of solitude inside the
earth, that pit marked with lines. What a lonely residence! What a
menacing domicile! What a forlorn exile! Imagine that the thunder- clap
has already pealed, the last hour has already come, and that you have
already emerged for the final judgment, falsehoods uncovered, excuses
obliter-
ated,truthscometothefore,andmattershavingtakentheircourse.Learnfrom
exemplary lessons, benefit from warnings, beware the conversion of
blessings into punishment! 1.156 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 1 Ar. māl,
which signifies movable wealth, including gold and silver, livestock,
and grain. 2 Opening lines same in §1.86. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 358 Text
and Translation 1.156.1مَرْبُ ملا نم ضاقتنٱو ممألا نم ةعْجَه لوطو لسرلا نم
ةرتف نيح ىلع هلسرأ فجاءهم بتصديق الذي بين يديه والنور المقتدى به. ذلك
القرآن فٱستنطقوه ولن ينطق ولـكن أُخبر كم عنه ألا إنّ فيه علم ما يأتي
والحديث عن الماضي ودواء دائكم ون َ ظْم ما بينكم. 1.156.2منها
الذئمويفةمقنهيفاوجلوأوةحْرَ تةملظلاهلخدأواّلإرَ بَوالورَدَمتيبىقبيالكلذدنعف
يبقى لهم في السماء عاذر ولا في الأرض ناصر. أصفيتم بالأمر غير أهله
وأوردتموه غير وِرْدهوسينتقماللهممّنظلممأكل ً
ابمأكلومشربًابمشربمنمطاعمالعلقمومشارب الص َ ملاو رِب َ ّ قِر ولباس شعار
الخوف ودِثار السيف وإنّما هم مَطايا الخطيئات وزوامل َ نَ تَ
لمسقأّمثمسقُأف.ماثآلا مّعطتتالواهقوذتالّمثةماخُ ّنلاظَفلُ تامكيدعبنمةّيمأاه َ
ّنَم َ ّخ .ناديدجلا َ ّرَك ام اًدبأ اهمعطب 1.157ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
ولقد أحسنت جوار كم وأحطت بجهدي من ورائكم وأعتقتكم من رِب َ ق الذلّ وحَل َ ق
ردأ اّمع اً قارطإو ليلقلاّربلل يّنم اً ركش ميضلا كه البصر وشهده البدن من
المنكَر الـكثير. 1.158ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.158.1أمره قضاء وحكمة
ورضاه أمان ورحمة يقضي بعلم ويعفو١ بحلم. اللّٰهمّ لك الحمد على ما تأخذ وتعطي
وعلى ما تعافي وتبتلي حمدًا يكون أرضى الحمد لك وأحب ّ الحمد إليك وأفضل
الحمد عندك حمدًا يملأ ما خلقت ويبلغ ما أردت حمدًا لا
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ: ⟩يغفر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 359 1.156.1 God sent Muḥammad after a period without
prophets, when people had long been in slumber and bonds had frayed.
Muḥammad brought them confirmation of earlier revelations and light for
them to follow---the Qurʾan. Ask it to speak to you, then! It cannot,
but I can tell you about it, so listen to me! The Qurʾan contains
knowledge of the future and reports of the past. It is the cure for your
illness and the benchmark for regulating your affairs. 1.156.2 From the
same oration: That day, when there remains no house of brick or
goat-hair tent that the tyrants have not steeped in grief or invaded
with cruelty, no one in the sky will grant the oppressors pardon and no
one on earth will offer them shelter. You offered the caliphate to those
who have no right to it,1 gave them access to a waterhole that is not
theirs, but God will exact revenge from the despots, exchanging one food
for another, one drink for another.Then they will swallow bitter morsels
of colocynth and gulp acid drafts of aloes and vinegar, they will wear
the garment of fear and their vestments will be the striking of swords.
What are they but beasts carrying sin and camels laden with wickedness!
I swear---and again I swear---that the Umayyads will spit out the
caliphate after me like a man spits out phlegm and mucus! After that
time, they will never get
tosavoritorenjoyitstasteforaslongasdayfollowsnightandnightfollowsday.
1.157 From an oration by ʿAlī: I protected you well and strove to keep
you safe. I freed you from the tethers of degradation and the fetters of
tyranny. All this in gratitude for small favors, while staying silent
about the great wrongs my eyes had seen and my body had suffered! 1.158
From an oration by ʿAlī:2 1.158.1 His command constitutes judgment and
wisdom, his acceptance con- stitutes safety and mercy, he judges with
knowledge and forgives with clemen- cy. God, we offer you praise for
what you grant and what you take back, for what you heal and what you
inflict. We offer the praise most acceptable to you, the praise most
liked by you, the praise most excellent in your eyes. We offer you
praise that fills the bounds of your creation and attains the limits
that you will 1 Ar. al-amr, lit. "the matter," translated here as "the
caliphate"; "those who have no right to it" are the Umayyads.
Ḥ9:218--219. 2 Iskāfī (Miʿyār, 257) and Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (ʿIqd, 4:167)
state that §1.158 is part of the Luminous Oration (Zahrāʾ), which also
includes §1.91 and §1.106. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 360 Text and
Translation يحجب عنك ولا يقصر دونك حمدًا لا ينقطع عدده ولا يفنى مَدده.
فلسنا نعلم كُنْهَ عظمتك إلّا أنّا نعلم أنّك حيّ قيّوم لا تأخذك سنة ولا نوم لم
ينته إليك نظر ولم يدركك
بصرأدركتالأبصاروأحصيتالأعمار١وأخذتبالنواصيوالأقداموماالذينرى من خلقك
ونعجب له من قدرتك ونصفه من عظيم سلطانك٢ وما تغيّب عنّا منه
وقصرتأبصارناعنهوٱنتهتعقولنادونهوحالتسواترالغيوببينناوبينهأعظم.فمن
فرّغقلبهوأعملفكرهليعلمكيفأقمتعرشكوكيفذرأتخلقكوكيفعلّقتفي الهواء سماواتك
وكيف مددت على مَوْر الماء أرضك رجع طرفه حسيرًا وعقله مبهورًا .اًرئاح هركفو اًهِ
لاو هعمسو 1.158.2منها يدّعي بزعمه أنّه يرجو الله كَذَب َ والعظيمِ ما باله لا
يتبي ّ ن رجاؤه في عمله وكلّ من رجا هّنإفهللا فوخاّلإق َ ّقحمفوخ ّلكو
لوخدمهّنإفهللاَءاجراّلإهلمع يفهؤاجرفرُع معلول يرجو الله في الـكبير ويرجو
العباد في الصغير فيعطي العبد ما لا يعطي الرب ّ فما وأ اًبذاكهل كئاجر يف
نوكت نأ فاختأ .هدابعب عنصي اّمع هب رَ ّصقي هؤانث ّلج هللا لاب تكون لا تراه
للرجاء موضعًا و كذلك إن هو خاف َ عبدًا من عبيده أعطاه من خوفه ما لا يعطي
ربّه فجعل خوفه من العباد نقدًا وخوفه من خالقهم ضِمارًا ووعدًا و كذلك من عظمت
الدنيا في عينه وكبر موقعها من قلبه آثرها على الله فٱنقطع إليها وصار عبدًا
لها. 1.158.3ولقد كان في رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآلهكاف ٍ لك في
الأسوة ودليل لك ُ فارطأ هنع تضبُ ق ذإ اهيواسمو اهيزاخَم ةرثكو اهبيعو
ايندلا ّمذ ىلع ها ووطّئت لغيره ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩الأعمال⟨.
٢ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩شانك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 361 it to attain. We offer you praise that is neither veiled
from you nor falls short in reaching you. We offer you praise in sums
that never end and gifts that never run out. We do not know the essence
of your majesty. All we know is that you are alive, existent, neither
slumber overtakes you nor sleep,1 nei- ther glances perceive you nor
eyes. You see all eyes, you reckon all lifespans, you seize people by
forelocks and feet.2 How little we understand of your cre- ation, how
inadequately we marvel at your strength, how feebly we describe your
great power! That which is hidden from us, which our eyes fall short of,
which our intellects fail to attain, which the veils of mystery prevent
us from discerning---that is far greater. Anyone who clears his heart
and applies his mind to comprehend how you established your throne,
originated your cre- ation, suspended the skies in the air, and spread
the earth on heaving water will have his glances befuddled, his
intellect bedazzled, his ears bewildered, and his reason bemused.
1.158.2 From the same oration: You claim that you place your hopes in
God. Great God, what lies! What is it with you!These hopes do not show
in your actions!When you place your hopes in anyone, your hopes show in
your actions, except for the hopes you say you place in God, which are
insincere. Every fear you feel is real except your fear of God, which is
a sham. You expect from God what is great, and from God's servants what
is small, but you offer to God's servants what you don't offer to your
Lord! How is it that your actions for God---may his praise be
exalted!--- fall short, when you do so much for God's servants? Are you
afraid that you may be making a mistake in relying on God, are you
worried he may not be the right place in which to lodge your hopes?
Likewise, when you fear one of God's servants, you render to him the awe
born of fear that you don't render to your Lord---you render your fear
to God's servants in ready cash, while you make your fear for God a
deferred promise. Indeed, those whose eyes find the world grand, whose
hearts find it imposing, give it preference over God. When this happens,
they become its devotees and servants. 1.158.3 The Messenger of God
should suffice you as exemplar, as proof of the
world'swickednessanditsflaws,itsmanydisgracesandevils.Theworld'shands
refused the Messenger their largesse, even though its wings were lowered
for others; he, in contrast, was weaned off its milk, and shoved away
from its orna- 1 Modified quote from Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:255. 2 Modified
quote from Qurʾan, Raḥmān 55:41. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 362 Text and
Translation أكنافها وف ُ طم من رَضاعها وزُوي عن زخارفها. وإن شئت ثنّيت
بموسى كليم الله صل ّ ى اللهعليهوآلهإذيقول﴿رَب تْلَزنَأاَ مِ ليِّ ن ِإ ِّ َ ل ِإ َ
َ فٍرْيَخ ْنِم َ ّي قِيرٌ﴾واللهماسألهإلّاخُبزًايأكله لأنّهكان يأكل ب َ قْلة الأرض
ولقد كانت خضرة الب َ هنطب قافِص فيفش نم ىرُ ت لْق له ُ زاله وتشذّب لحمه. وإن
شئت ثلّثت بداود عليه السلام صاحب المزامير وقارئ أهل لكأيو اهعيب ينيفكي
مّكيأ هئاسلجل لوقيو هديب صوُ خلا فئافَس لمعي ناك دقلف ةّنجلا
قرصالشعيرمنثمنها.وإنشئتقلتفيعيسىبنمريمعليهماالسلامفلقدكانيتوسّد الحجر
ويلبس الخشن وكان إدامه الجوع وسراجه بالليل القمر وظلاله في الشتاء مشارق
الأرضومغاربهاوفاكهتهوريحانهماتنبتالأرضللبهائمولمتكنلهزوجةتفتنهولا ولد
يحزنه ولا مال يلفته ولا طمع يذل ّ ه دابّته رجلاه وخادمه يداه. 1.158.4سَأَ
تف َ ّ بنبيّكالأطيبالأطهرصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهفإنّ فيهإسوةلمنتأسّىوعزاء
لمنتعزّىوأحب ّ العبادإلىاللهالمتأسّيبنبيّهوالمقتص ُ ّ لأثرهق َ اهْرِعُ
يملواًمضقايندلاَمَض نأ ىبأف ايندلا هيلع تضرُع اً نطب ايندلا نم مهصمخأو اًحْشَك
ايندلا لهأ ُمَضْهَأ اً فْرَط نكيملولوهرّغصفاً ئيشرّغصوهرقحفاً ئيشرقحوهضغبأفاً
ئيشضغبأهللانأملعواهلبقي رمأ نع ةّداحُمو هلل اً قاقش هب ىفكـل هللا رّغص ام
انميظعتو هللا ضغبأ ام انّبح اّلإ انيف الله. ولقد كان صل ّ ى الله عليه يأكل
على الأرض ويجلس جِلسة العبد ويخصف بيده هتيب باب ىلع رتِّسلا نوكيو .هفلخ فدرُ
يو يراعلا رامحلا بكريو هبوث هديب عقريو هلعن فتكونفيهالتصاويرفيقول
⟩يافلانة⟨لإحدىأزواجه ⟩غيّبيهعنّيفإن ّ يإذانظرتإليه ذ كرت الدنيا وزخارفها⟨.
فأعرض عن الدنيا بقلبه وأمات ذ كرها من نفسه وأحب ّ أن al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 363 ments. If you wish, I will give you a second example,
that of Moses, he to whom God spoke. Moses beseeched, «My Lord, I am in
dire need of whatever you may bestow!»1 By God, Moses asked God for
nothing more than a piece of bread, for he had only wild plants to eat.
He was so thin, his flesh so pared, that the green of the plants he had
eaten shone through the translucent skin of his stomach. If you wish, I
will give you a third example, that of David, he with the Psalms,
reciter for the people of paradise. David would plait palm fronds with
his own two hands and say to his associates, "Who will sell these for
me?" then he would eat a coarse loaf of barley purchased with its sale.
And if you wish, I will also tell you about Jesus, son of Mary. Jesus
would use a rock for a pillow and wear rough garments. His food was
hunger, his lamp at night the moon, his shelter in the winter the sun's
rays from East and West, his fruit and his fragrance the plants grown by
the earth for the beasts. He had no wife to distract him, no son to
grieve him, no wealth to occupy him, no greed to bring him low. His
mount was his own two feet, his servant his own two hands. 1.158.4
People,followtheexampleof yourownvirtuousandpureProphet.Any who look for
an exemplar can find one in him. Any who look for consolation can find
it in him. Of all his servants, God loves most the one who follows the
example of his Prophet, who walks in his footsteps.The Prophet took the
small- est morsel from the world, he never gave the world a full glance.
His waist was the most emaciated, his stomach the emptiest of worldly
things.The world was offered to him, but he refused. He knew that God
hated it, so he hated it too. He knew that God considered it wretched,
so he considered it wretched too. He knew that God considered it of
little worth, so he considered it of little worth too. People, if our
only faults are love for what God hates and exaltation of what he
considers paltry, they would be sufficient to count as opposition to God
and challenge to his command! The Prophet used to eat on the ground and
sit like a servant. He used to mend his sandals with his own hands. He
used to patch his garments with his own hands. He used to ride an
unsaddled donkey, not even alone, but with someone often sitting behind
him. A curtain with images was hung on the door of his home, and he said
to one of his wives, ⟨Remove it from my sight---it reminds me of the
world and its ornaments!⟩He turned his heart away from the world, he
suppressed its mention in his heart, he pre- ferred that its adornments
be removed from his eyes, so that he would not to be seduced by its soft
luxuries or led to view it as a lasting home or permanent residence. He
drove it from his spirit, banished it from his heart, and removed it 1
Qurʾan, Qaṣaṣ28:24. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 364 Text and
Translation تغيب زينتها عن عينه لكيلا يتّخذ منها رِياشًا ولا يعتقدها قرارًا
ولا يرجو فيها مقامًا فأخرجها من النفس وأشخصها عن القلب وغيّبها عن البصر و
اً ئيش ضغبأ نم كلذك أبغض أن ينظر إليه وأن ي ُ ذ كر عنده. ولقد كان في رسول
الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ما يدلّك على مساوي الدنيا وعيوبها إذ جاع فيها
مع خاصّته وزويت عنه زخارفها مع عظيم زلفته. فلينظر ناظر بعقله أَكْر َ مَالله
محمّدًا بذلك أم أهانه فإن قال أهانه فقد كذب والعظيمِ وإن قال أكرمه فليعلم
أنّ الله قد أهان غيره حيث بسط الدنيا له وزَواها عن أقرب الناس منه. فتأسّى
متأّسٍ بنبيّه وٱقتص ّ أثره وولج مَوْلِ جه وإلّا فلا تأمن الهلـكة فإنّ الله جعل
محمّدًا صل ّ جرخ .ةبوقعلاب اًرذنمو ةّنجلاب اًرّشبمو ةعاسلل اً مَ لَ ع هلآو هيلع
هللا ى باجأو ١هليبسل ىضم ىّتح رجح ىلع اً رَجَح عضي مل اًميلس ةرخآلا دروو
اًصيمخ ايندلا نم داعي ربّه فما أعظم منّة الله عندنا حين أنعم علينا به سلفًا
نتّبعه وقائدًا نطأ عقبه. والله لقد رقعت ُ مِدْرَعتي هذه حتّى ٱستحييت من
راقعها. ولقد قال لي قائل ألا صلاَدْنِع⟩ـف يّنع برغٱ تلقف اهُذِبْنَ ت َ مْحُي ِحاَ ب
َ ّ .⟨ىٰرُ ّسلاُمْوَقلاُد 1.159ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ابتعثه بالنور المضيّ
والبرهان الجليّ والمنهاج البادي والكتاب الهادي أُسرته خير أسرة وشجرته خير
شجرة أغصانها معتدلة وثمارها متهدّلة مولده بمكّة وهجرته بطَيْبة علا بها ذ كره
وٱمتدّ منها صوته أرسله بحجّةكافية وموعظة شافية ودعوة متلافية أظهر به
الشرائع المجهولة وقمع به البدع المدخولة وبي ّ َ تْبَ ي نَم﴿ـف .ةلوصفملا
ماكحألا هب ن َ لْس ِإْلاَرْيَ غ ِغ امِ
١م،وأضيفتفيهامشھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ:سقطت ⟩لسبيله⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
365 fromhissight;forthosewhohateathinghatetolookatit,andtheyhatetohave
it mentioned. The Messenger's story teaches you about the evils of the
world and its flaws. He faced hunger and his loved ones did too. Its
ornaments were kept from him despite his closeness to God. Let the
discerning mind think: Did God honor Muḥammad by this or demean him? If
he answers, "God demeaned him," then, by God, he lies! If he answers,
"God honored him," then that per- son should know that God, in fact,
demeaned others to whom he gave worldly
chattels,whileturningthemawayfromtheoneclosesttohim.Anywhoseekan
exemplar should follow God's Prophet, walk in his footsteps, and enter
through his door, else he will face perdition. God has made Muḥammad the
banner for the coming hour, the herald of paradise, the warner ahead of
the decisive pun- ishment. Leaving the world empty-bellied, he entered
the hereafter in sound health. Never once did he build a grand house, or
place stone upon stone, until at last he answered his Lord's call and
went on to his final abode. What a great favor God has granted us,
having blessed us with Muḥammad as an exemplar to follow, a commander in
whose footsteps to walk. By God, I too have patched my rough cloak so
often that I am embarrassed to have it mended. Someone said to me, "Why
don't you throw it away?" and I replied, "Get away from me! ⟨When
morning comes, the night-traveler will be praised!⟩"1 1.159 From an
oration by ʿAlī: God sent Muḥammad with brilliant light, clear proof, a
distinct path, and a book of guidance. His family is the best family,
his tree is the best tree, its branches straight and tall, its fruits
hanging low. His birth was in Mecca, his migration was to Ṭaybah,2 from
there his fame rose high, and his voice spread far and wide. God sent
Muḥammad with ample evidence, healing counsel, and an enlivening faith,3
through him, he revived abandoned laws,4 crushed newfangled heresies,
and explained decreed rules. Indeed, «whoever seeks a religion other
than Islam»5 will find his wretchedness real, his support bro- 1 A line
of rajaz by the pre-Islamic poet Jumayḥibn al-Sharīd al-Taghlibī, used
proverbially to mean that fortitude begets a praiseworthy result. F 270;
Abū Hilāl, Jamharah, 2:32, 2:42; Bakrī, Faṣl al-maqāl, 254, 334;
Maydānī, 2:3, §2382; Jāḥiẓ, Ḥayawān, 6:508. 2 Earlier Yathrib,
Ṭaybah---"The Pure (City)"---is the name given by Muḥammad to his new
hometown. After Muḥammad's migration, people began referring to it as
"The City of the Prophet" (Madīnat al-nabī) in short, Medina, which is
how it is best known. 3 Ar. daʿwah, lit. call. 4 Ar. sharāʾiʿ sing.,
sharīʿah, lit. paths, potentially referring to the laws of earlier
prophets. 5 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:85. The verse may also be translated,
«... other than commitment (islām) to God's will». al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 366 Text
and Translation دِينًا﴾تتحققّ شقوته وتنفصم عروته وتعظم كبوته ويكن مآبه إلى
الحزن الطويل والعذاب الوبيل. وأتوكّل على الله توكّل الإنابة إليه وأسترشده
السبيل المؤدّية إلى جنّته القاصدة إلى محلّ رغبته. أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى
الله وطاعته فإنّها النجاة غدًا
والمنجاةأبدًا.رهّبفأبلغورغّبفأسبغووصفلـكمالدنياوٱنقطاعهاوزوالهاوٱنتقالها
فأعرضوا عمّا يعجبكم فيها لقل ّ ة ما يصحبكم منها أقرب دار من سخط الله
وأبعدها من رضوان الله فغُضّوا عنكم عباد الله غمومها وأشغالها لما قد أيقنتم
به من فراقها وتصرّف حالاتهافٱحذروهاحذرالشفيقالناصحوالمُج ِ دّ
الكادحوٱعتبروابماقدرأيتممنمصارع القرون قبلـكم قد تزايلت أوصالهم وزالت
أسماعهم وأبصارهم وذهب شرفهم وعزّهم وٱنقطعسرورهمونعيمهم.فبدّلوابقربالأولادف
َ قْدها١وبصحبةالأزواجمفارقتهالا يتفاخرون ولا يتناسلون ولا يتزاورون ولا
يتجاورون. فٱحذروا عباد الله حذر الغالب لنفسه المانع لشهوته الناظر٢ بعقله
فإنّ الأمر واضح والعَلَم قائم والطريق جَدَد والسبيل قصد. 1.160ومن كلامه عليه
السلام لبعض أصحابه وقد سألهكيف دفعكم قومكم عن هذا المقام وأنتم أحقّ به
فقال ِ لَقَ لكّنإدسأينباخأاي ةلأسملا ّقحورهِّصلاةمامِذُدعبكلودَدَسريغيفلِسرُ
تنيضَولا ُق نو ُ ّدشألاو اً بسن نوَ لعألا نحنو ماقملا اذهب انيلع دادبتسالا
اّمأ .ملعٱف تملعتسٱ دقو َ حلاو نيرخآ سوفن اهنع تخسو موق سوفن اهيلع تّحَش ةرَ
ثَأ تناك اهّنإف اًطْوَ ن لوسرلاب كَمُ .⟨اهدعُ ب⟩
:شيفةخسنو،نلصأ.اذك:نيفةحّحصمو،ھ،ي،ش،م١ ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ، ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم:
⟩الناطق⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
367 ken, and his tread unsteady. His final return will be to
long-lasting grief and
painfulpunishment.IplacemytrustinGodandturntohim.Iseekhisguidance in
finding the path that will lead to his Garden and direct me to his
pleasure. Servants of God! I counsel you to be conscious of him and obey
him, for that will bring you salvation on the morrow and eternal
deliverance. He cautioned you to beware and gave full warning. He
directed you to earn reward and gave complete measure. He described the
world to you and told you of its severance, its transience, its
departure. People, turn away from everything in it that excite your
wonder, because it will not be with you for long.This world is the
domicile that is closest to God's anger and farthest from his pleasure.
Servants of God, be certain of its separation and mutability, turn your
eyes away from its griefs and occupations, be true to your soul and work
hard for it, fear the world's dealings, and learn from the generations
before you that you have seen die. Their limbs fell asunder, their ears
and eyes ceased to function, their grandeur and might were lost, their
happiness and joys were severed. In place of proximity to their children
they were given loss, in place of the companionship of spouses they were
given isolation. They no longer boast, or procreate, or visit, or
associate. Servants of God, beware! Control your passions, restrain your
desires, and use your intellect! The matter is clear, the banner is
erect, the road is compact, and the path is straightforward. 1.160 From
an address by ʿAlī, to one of his associates who asked him, "How is it
that your tribe has driven you away from this position when you are
worthier?" ʿAlī answered:1 You man of Asad! Your girth is loose, and you
fire without aim!2 Still, you possess kinship through marriage, and have
the right to ask.3 You want to know, so I will give you an answer: The
injustice done to us concerning this position---when we are loftier in
lineage and our kinship with the Messenger is closer---was an act of
amoral appropriation. Some hearts coveted it, other 1 Ṣadūq (Amālī,
716--717) places this address at Ṣiffīn in 37/657; the speaker is a man
from the Dūdān clan of Asad. "This position" (hādhā l-maqām), refers to
the caliphate; Sunni com- mentators (Ḥ2:243; also mentioned in B 543)
interpret the referent as the Shūrā Council who elected ʿUthmān, while
Shiʿi commentators (B 543; R 2:125) interpret the referent as ʿUthmān in
particular, but also Abū Bakr and ʿUmar. 2 Refers to the man's lack of
discernment and his speaking out of turn. R 2:122; Ḥ9:242; B 543; F 271.
3 ʿAlī's kinship to the Asad tribe was through one of the following
Asadī women: (1) ʿAlī's wife Laylā bint Masʿūd ibn Khālid (F 271--272);
(2) an unnamed wife of ʿAlī (R 2:123); (3) the Prophet's wife Zaynab
bint Jaḥsh (Ḥ9:242--243; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd says ʿAlī himself never mar-
ried into Asad). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 368 Text and
Translation ِ تاَ رَجَح ْيِف َحْيِص اً بْهَن َكْنَع ْعَدَو⟩ .ُةمايقلا هيلإ دوعَ ملاو
هللا هٖ⟨١ وهَل ُ َ خلا َ ّم طْب في ٱبن أبي ُ يوبجعلاغرفتسياً
بطخهلايفهللاوَوْرَغالوهئاكبإدعبرهدلاينكحضأدقلفنايفس كثر َ ف َ ّدَسو هحابصم
نم هللا رون ءافطإ موقلا لواح دَوَألا ينيب اوحَدَجو هعوبنَ ي نم هُراّو وبينهم ش
ِ نإو هضحم ىلع ّقحلا نم مهلمحأ ىولبلا نحم مهنعو اّنع عفترت نإف .اً ئيبو
اًبْر َ لَ ف﴿ ىرخألا نكت ا ت َ ذْهَب ْ ن َ ِ هْيَ لَ ع َكُسْف مْ حَس َ رَات ِ لَ عَ
هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ ٍ َ ي اَ مِبٌ مي ص ْ ن َ عُونَ﴾. 1.161ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.161.1الحمد لله خالق العباد وساطح المهاد ومسيّل الوِهاد ومخصب النِّجاد ليس
لأوّليّته ٱبتداء ولا لأزليّته ٱنقضاء هو الأوّل لم يزل والباقي بلا أجل خرّت له
الجِباه دودحلابماهوألاهرّدقتالاههبشنم٢هلةنابإاهلهقلخدنعَءايشألا َ
ّدَحهافِّشلاهتد َ ّحَوو والحركات ولا بالجوارح والأدوات لا يقال له متى ولا
يضرب له أمد بحتّى الظاهر لا يقال ممّا والباطن لا يقال فيما لا شَب َ ُ يف
بوجحم الو ىّضقتُ يف ٌح حوى لم يقرب من الأشياء بٱلتصاق ولم يبعد عنها
بٱفتراق لا يخفى عليه من عباده شخوص لحظة ١البحر:الطويل. ٢م،ي:كذا.ش،ھ:
⟩لها⟨.ن:سقطتعنالمتن،وفيالهامش )لهاله(. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 369 hearts relinquished it, and God is the judge, the
resurrection the time of return. But ⟨forget about the looting that
caused screams in the neighborhood⟩and call out the crime of Abū
Sufyān's son!1 Time has made me weep and then laugh!2 No wonder, by God!
What a calamity, what astonishment, what toil! These people seek to
extinguish the light of God's lamp and block the water that gushes from
his wellspring. They pour pestilence into the water between themandus.If
thesecalamitoustrialsarelifted,Ishalldrivethemonthecourse of
unadulterated truth. If the opposite, well, «do not grieve over their
actions, for God knows all that they do!»3 1.161 From an oration by
ʿAlī:4 1.161.1 Praise God, who created his servants, unfurled the earth,
filled valleys with streams, and covered highlands with green. His
primacy has no begin- ning, and his perpetuity never concludes, he is
first without ceasing, and eter- nal without end, foreheads touch the
ground before him, and lips declare his oneness. He demarcated all the
entities he created to differentiate between their likeness and him.5
Imaginations cannot evaluate him with perimeters and movements, nor with
limbs and instruments. It cannot be asked of him, "When?" nor can a
limit be set for him by saying, "Until." He is the manifest
aboutwhomnoonecanask,"Fromwhat?"andthehidden,aboutwhomnoone can ask, "In
what?" He is neither a form that can be destroyed, nor is he veiled and
thus encompassed. He is neither near to things by adherence nor remote
from them by separation. An unblinking gaze, an echoing word, an
approach to a hilltop, a lengthening of step---none of his servants'
actions are hidden from 1 Thequotationisthefirsthemistichof
aproverbialversebythepre-IslamicpoetImruʾal-Qays (Imruʾ al-Qays, Dīwān,
140; Maydānī, Majmaʿ al-amthāl, s.v. "D-ʿ"), said to mean the following:
Forget about the previous looting, viz., by the first three Sunni
caliphs, or, by the Shūrā Coun- cil. The second hemistich, which would
also be evoked for the audience and the real point of the citation, is
(ولـكنْ حديثًا ما حديثُ الرواحلٖ " :)but the real story is the story of the
riding camels," interpreted as: At this moment, we should worry about
more immediate events, viz., "the crime of Abū Sufyān's son," who is
Muʿāwiyah ibn Abī Sufyān, governor of Damascus, who fought ʿAlī at the
Battle of Ṣiffīn, and later became the first Umayyad caliph (B 544; Ḥ
9:243--246; R 2:124; F 272; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 426). 2 The laughter is in
disbelief and astonishment. Ḥ9:246--247; B 544. 3 Qurʾan, Fāṭir 35:8. 4
Delivered in the Grand Mosque of Kufa, presumably during ʿAlī's
caliphate 35--40/656--661, in
responsetoanunnamedJewishmanfromYemenwhoaskedhimtodescribetheLord(Ṣadūq,
Tawḥīd, 78--79). 5 Thus, if read as lahū (ms M, Y, commentaries Ḥ9:252,
B 544, ʿA 634). If read as lahā (ms Sh, H, and commentaries Kaydarī,
2:126, F 273): "to differentiate them from each other." al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 370 Text and
Translation ولا كرور لفظة ولا ٱزدلاف ربوة ولا ٱنبساط خطوة في ليل داج ٍ
ولا غسق ساج ٍ يتفيّأ عليه القمر المنير وتعقبه الشمس ذات النور في الـكرور
والأفول وتقليب الأزمنة والدهور من إقبال ليل مقبل وإدبار نهار مدبر. قبل
كلّ غاية ومدّة وكلّ إحصاء وعدّة تعالى عمّا ينحله المحدّدون من صفات الأقدار
ونهايات الأقطار وتأثّل المساكن وتمكّن الأماكن فالحدّ لخلقه مضروب وإلى غيره
منسوب. لم يخلق الأشياء من أصول أزليّة ولا من أوائل ب َ ديّة١ بل خلق ما خلق
فأقام حدّه وصوّر ما صوّر فأحسن صورته ليس لشيء منه ٱمتناع ولا له بطاعة شيء
ٱنتفاع علمه بالأموات الماضين كعلمه بالأحياء الباقين وعلمه بما في
السماوات العلى كعلمه بما في الأرضين السفلى. 1.161.2منها أيّها المخلوق
السوي ّ والمنشأ المرعيّ في ظلمات الأرحام ومضاعفات الأستار ب ُ ديت ﴿مِن سُل
َ َ ل ِإ نيِك َ ّم ٍراَ رَ ق يِف﴿ تعضوو﴾نيِط نِّمٍةَ لا ىٰق َ رومت موسقم لجأو﴾موُ
لْع َ ّم ٍرَد تجرخُأّمثءادنعمستالوءاعدريـحُتالاً نينجكّمأنطبيف َ
منمقرّكإلىدارلمتشهدها
ولمتعرفسبلمنافعهافمنهداكلٱجترار٢الغذاءمنثديأمّكوعرّفك٣عندالحاجة مواضع طلبك
وإرادتك. هيهات إنّ من يعجز عن صفات ذي الهيئة والأدوات فهو عن صفات خالقه
أعجز ومن تناوله بحدود المخلوقين أبعد. 1.162هولأسو نامثع ىلع هومقن ام
اوكشو هيلإ سانلا عمتجٱ اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو مخاطبته عنهم
وٱستعتابه لهم فدخل على عثمان فقال ١م،ي:كذا.ش،ن،ھ،ونسخةفيي: ⟩أبديّة⟨.
٢ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩لٱحتراز⟨. ٣ش، ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩وحرّك⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
371 him,eveninthedarkestnight,eveninmotionlessdusk.Themoonshinesabove
the darkness, and the blazing sun follows, rising and setting in the
rotation of eras and eons, with nights advancing and days in retreat. He
is before every end and term, every reckoning and calculation. He is
exalted above every descrip- tion ascribed to him: attributes of
quantity, terminal points in space, location in dwellings, and fixedness
in place. Limits are specified for his creation---they relate only to
beings other than him. He did not create things from eternal
fundamentals or timeless principles. Rather, he created what he created
and established its limit, he shaped what he shaped and made it
beautiful. No one can withstand his power, just as no one can seek to
benefit him by obeying him. His knowledge of the dead equals his
knowledge of the living, his knowledge of what is in the lofty skies
equals his knowledge of what is in the nethermost regions of the earth.
1.161.2 From the same oration: O you who have been created with
harmonious proportions, carefully nur- tured in the darkness of wombs
and the multiplicity of veils. You began as «an extraction of clay»1 and
were placed in «a safe abode for a known term»2 and an ordained
duration. You quickened in your mother's belly as a fetus, never
answeringacallorhearingashout.Thenyouwerebroughtoutof yourdwelling to an
abode you had not witnessed, and whose benefits you did not know how to
attain. Who guided you then to suckle from your mother's breast? Who
showed you in your time of need the place where you could obtain what
you sought and wished for? One who is incapable of describing a being
with form and appendages is even more incapable of describing the
creator, far from it! He is even further from being able to grasp the
creator through the definitions of created beings. 1.162 From an address
by ʿAlī, when people gathered around him to complain of wrongs ʿUthmān
had committedand asked ʿAlī toremonstrate with him on their behalf and
rebuke him. ʿAlī went to ʿUthmān and said:3 1 Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:12. 2
Qurʾan, Mursalāt 77:21--22. 3 In Medina, in 35/656, toward the end of
ʿUthmān's caliphate. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:336--337. Ibn Abī Quḥāfah is the
first Sunni caliph, Abū Bakr. Ibn al-Khaṭṭāb is the second Sunni caliph,
ʿUmar. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 372 Text and
Translation 1.162.1إنّ الناس ورائي وقد ٱستسفروني بينك وبينهم ووالله ما
أدري ما أقول لك ما ءيش ىلإ كانقبس ام ملعن ام ملعتل كّنإ هفرعت ال رمأ ىلع
كّلدأ الو هلهجت اً ئيش فرعأ فنخبرك عنه ولا خلونا بشيء فنبلّغَكَه وقد رأيت كما
رأينا وسمعت كما سمعنا وصحبت رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآلهكما صحبنا وما
ٱبن أبي قحافة ولا ٱبن الخطّاب بأولى بعمل الحقّ منك وأنت أقرب إلى رسول الله
صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله وَشِيجةَرَحِمٍ منهما وقد نلت لهج نم مَ ّلعُ ت الو ىمع نم رَ
ّصبُ ت ام هللاو كّنإف كسفن يفَ هللاَ هللاف .الاني مل ام هرهص نم وإن الطرق
لواضحة وإنّ أعلام الدين لقائمة. 1.162.2فٱعلم أنّ أفضل عباد الله عند الله
إمام عادل هُدي وهَدى فأقام سنّة معلومة وأمات بدعة مجهولة وإنّ السنن لنيّرة
لها أعلام وإنّ البدع لظاهرة لها أعلام وإنّ شرّ الناس عند الله إمام جائر ضَلّ
وضُلّ به فأمات سنّة مأخوذة وأحيا بدعة مترو كة وإن ّ ي سمعت رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله يقول ⟩يؤتى يوم القيامة بالإمام الجائر وليس معه نصير ولا
عاذر١ فيلقى في جهنّم فيدور فيها كما تدور الرحى ثمّيرتبط في قعرها⟨. وإن ّ ي
أنشدك الله أن تكون إمام هذه الأمّة المقتول فإنّهكان يقال ⟩ي ُ قتل في هذه
الأمّة إمام ثبَ يو اهيلع اهَرومأ سِبلَ يو⟨ةمايقلا موي ىلإ لاتقلاو لتقلا اهيلع
حتفي ّ الفتن فيها فلا يبصرون الحقّ من الباطل يموجون فيها موجًا ويمر ُ جون
فيها مَرْجًا. فلا تكوننّ لمروان سَيِّقة يسوقك حيث شاء بعد جلال السنّ وتقضّي
العمر. 1.162.3فقال له عثمان كَلِّم الناس في أن يؤجّلوني حتّى أَخْرُج إليهم من
مظالمهم. ١ش، ن، ي، ھ، ومصحّحة في م: كذا. أصل م: سقطت من الجملة بعض
الألفاظ فجاء ⟩يؤتى بالإمامالجائروليسمعهعاذر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 373 1.162.1 People have gathered behind me, and they have
sent me to negotiate. By God, I don't know what to say! There is nothing
I know that you don't, no path I can guide you to that you are not
familiar with already. You know what we know, we have not preceded you
to something that we can tell you about, nor privately learned something
we can share. You have seen what we saw, you have associated with God's
Messenger as we did. In truth, Ibn Abī Quḥāfah and Ibn al-Khaṭṭāb were
not worthier of doing what is right than you!You are closer to the
Messenger in kinship, and you, not they, have the honor of being his
son- in-law. Fear God for the sake of your soul! By God, you do not need
to be given sight as though you were blind, or knowledge as though you
were ignorant!The roads are clear, and faith's banners stand high.
1.162.2 Know that the best of his servants in God's eyes is a just
leader who is rightly guided and guides aright, who establishes
time-honored practices and puts to death unacceptable heresies. The
paths of the Sunnah are brightly illu- mined and have their banners.
Innovations are also clearly visible, and they too have their banners.
The worst of people in God's eyes is an unjust leader who goes astray
and leads people astray, who puts to death time-honored prac- tices and
revives abandoned heresies. I have heard the Messenger of God say, ⟨On
the day of resurrection, the unjust leader will be brought for judgment,
and he will not have a single person to help him or speak on his behalf.
He will be thrown into the Pit of Gehenna and spin there like a
millstone, then he will be tethered in its lowest point.⟩I ask you in
God's name, do not be the slain leader of this community, for it has
been said that "a leader will be slain in this community who will open
unto it the door of killing and assault till the resurrection." The
community's affairs will slide into chaos and sedi- tions will become
widespread, such that people will stop distinguishing right from wrong.
They will heave in agitated waves, disordered and confused. At your
advanced age, having neared the end of your life, don't become a camel
driven by Marwān's whim!1 1.162.3 ʿUthmān responded to ʿAlī: Talk to the
people and ask them to give me time to address their grievances. 1
Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam, who had earlier been exiled along with his father
from Medina by the Prophet, was a member of the Umayyad clan and one of
ʿUthmān's chief advisors during his caliphate. Later, he fought against
ʿAlī at the Battle of the Camel but reluctantly pledged allegiance to
him in defeat. After the death of Muʿāwiyah's grandson Muʿāwiyah ii,
Marwān became the first caliph of the Marwānid branch of the Umayyads.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 374 Text and
Translation فقال عليه السلام ما كان بالمدينة فلا أجل فيه وما غاب فأجله
وصول أمرك إليه. 1.163ومن خطبة له عليه السلام يذ كر فيها عجيب خلقة
الطاووس 1.163.1نم ماقأو تاكرح يذو نكاسو تاومو ناويح نم اً بيجع اًقْلَخ
مهعدتبا ةمّ
لسموهبةفرتعملوقعلاهلتداقنٱامهتردقميظعوهتعنصفيطلىلعتانّيبلادهاوش لهون َ
عَقَت ْ فيأسماعنادلائلهعلىوحدانيّتهوماذَرَأَ منمختلفصورالأطيارالتيأسكنها
أخاديد الأرض وخروق فجاجها ورواسي أعلامها من ذوات أجنحة مختلفة وهيئات
متباينة مصرّفة في زمام التسخير ومرفرِفة بأجنحتها في مخارق الجوّ المنفسح
والفضاء ةبجتحم لصافم قاقِح يف اهبّكرو ةرهاظ روص بئاجع يف نكت مل ذإ دعب اهَنَ
ّوَك .جرفنملا فِدي هلعجو اً فوفخ ١ءامسلا يف ومسي نأ هقلخ ةلابَعب اهضعب عنمو
ّ دفيفًا ونسقها على
ٱختلافهافيالأصابيغبلطيفقدرتهودقيقصنعتهفمنهامغموسفيقالبلونلايشوبه غير لون
ما غُمس فيه ومنها مغموس في لون صِبْغٍ قد طُرّق٢ بخلاف ما صبغ به. 1.163.2ومن
أعجبها خلقًا الطاووس الذي أقامه في أحكم تعديل ونضّد ألوانه في أحسن تنضيد
بجناح أسرج٣ قصبه وذَنَب أطال مِسحَبه إذا درج إلى الأنثى نشره من طَيِّه يراد
ٌعْلِق هّنأكهسأر ىلع اً ّلِطُم هب امسو ٌّ عَن َ َ يَزب سيميو هناولأب لاتخي هُ
ّيتون هَج فانه يفضي كإفضاء الدِّي َ فيعض ىلع ليحي نمك ال ةنياعم ىلع كلذ نم
كليحُأ .ةحقالمب ّرُؤَ يو ةك يتّفَض فقتف هعمادم ٤اهحفست ةعمدب حقلُ ي هّنأ معزي
نم معزك ناك ولو .هدانسإ ١ش، ن، ي، ھ: كذا. م، ونسخة في ي: ⟩الهواء⟨. ٢ش،
ن، ھ: كذا. م، ي، ونسخة في ش، ھ: ⟩طوّق⟨. ٣ش،ن:كذا.م،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش: ⟩أشرج⟨.
٤ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م، ونسخةفين،ي،ھ: ⟩تنشجها⟨.ونسختانفيش: ⟩تسحّها⟨و⟩تبجسها⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
375 ʿAlī replied: For grievances within Medina, there can be no
reprieve. For those from other places, you can have only as much time as
it takes for your orders to get there. 1.163 From ʿAlī's oration in
which he describes the wondrous creation of the peacock: 1.163.1 God
created wondrous creatures, living beings, inanimate bodies, still
objects, and things that move, and he set up clear testimonies to his
sublime craftsmanship and great power, impelling intellects to recognize
and submit to him. Proofs of his oneness cry out to our ears, including
the birds that he cre- ated in a multitude of forms, that he lodged in
the furrows of the earth and in the crevices of its mountain passes and
mighty crags. Possessing many kinds of
wingsanddifferentshapes,allarecontrolledbythereinof subjugation,yetsoar
in spaces within the vastness of the ether and the wide-open skies. He
brought them from non-being into being in marvelous forms. He fitted
joints to sockets and covered them with flesh. He made some birds bulky,
preventing them from rising easily into the sky, and causing them to
flutter and flap on the ground. He fashioned them all differently, in
diverse hues, with his sublime power and pre- cise craftsmanship. Some
he gave a single unadulterated color, others he dyed with a color
iridescent with the sheen of a second hue. 1.163.2 The most marvelous of
birds in the manner of its creation is the pea- cock, which is formed by
the creator in the most congruent harmony, with its colors arrayed in
the best possible way, with wings of interlacing, golden feather-shafts,
and a tail with a lengthened train. When it approaches the hen, the
peacock spreads out the folds of its tail and lifts it high over its
head, like a Dārī sail hoisted by a boatman.1 It struts haughtily in its
many colors and swag- gers dragging its train. It mates in the manner of
the cockerel, leaping onto the female and inseminating it. I relate this
to you from observation, not as one whose narrations are based on weak
attribution.2 Even if it were the case, as some believe, that the
peacock inseminates through a teardrop emitted by its tear ducts and
poised on the edge of its eyelids, and that the female imbibes it 1 Dārī
is a relative adjective from Dārīn, the name of the main settlement on
an island near Qaṭīf,ontheeasterncoastof
present-daySaudiArabia.Inpre-IslamicandearlyIslamictimes, Dārīn was the
main port of Bahrain, through which musk was imported from India. Yāqūt,
Muʿjam al-buldān, 2:432, s.v. "Dārīn"; B 549; Ḥ9:268. 2 Although not
native to the Arabian Peninsula, peacocks were common in the Persian
empire, and the commentators state that ʿAlī would have seen them in
Kufa. Ḥ9:270; Jāḥiẓ, Ḥayawān 7:170, 186. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 376 Text
and Translation جفونه وأنّ أنثاه تطعم ذلك ثمّتبيض لا من لقاح فحل سوى الدمع
المنبجس لما كان ذلك بأعجب من مطاعمة الغراب. تَخال ق َ صَبه مَداري من فضّة
وما أنبت عليها من عجيب داراته وشموسه خالص العِقيان وفِل َ ّلكةرهز نم ينُج
ّيِنَج تلق ضرألا تتبنأ امب هتهّبش نإف دَجْرَ بَ ّزلا ذ ربيع وإن ضاهيته بالملابس
فهو كم َ ِ نوُم وأ للُ حلا ّيشْو ق عَص ْ ب اليمن وإن شاكلته بالحليّ فهو كفصوص
ذات ألوان قد ن ُ لاتخملا حِرَ ملا يشم يشمي .لَ ّلكملا نيَ ج ُ ّللاب تقّط
ويتصفّح ذنَبه وجناحه في ُ قَهْقِهُضاحكًا لجمال سرباله وأصابيغ وِشاحه فإذا رمى
ببصره همئاوق ّنأل هعّجوت قداصب دهشيو هتثاغتسٱ نع نيبُ ي داكي توصب اًلِوْعُم
اقَز همئاوق ىلإ حُمْش ٌ كقوائم الديكة الخِلاسيّة وقد نجمت من ظُنبوب ساقه صيصيّة
خفيّة وله في هنطب ثيح ىلإ اهزرغمو قيربإلاكهقنع جرخمو ةاّشَوُم ءارضخ ةعُزْنُ ق
فرُعلا عضوم كصِبغ الوَسْمة اليمانيّة أو كحريرةٍ مُلب َ سة مرآةً ذات َ صِقال وكأنّه
متلفّع١ بم ِ عْجَرٍ أَس ْ ح َ م هعمس قتف عمو .هب ةجزتمم ةرضانلا ةرضخلا ّنأ
هقيرَ ب ةّدشو هئام ةرثكـل لّيخي هّنأ اّلإ خَط ٌّ كم ُ ستدق َ ي ضيبأ ناوُ حْقُألا
نول يف ملقلا ّ قَقٌ فهو ببياضه في سواد ما هنالك َ بو هقيرَ بو هلاقص ةرثكب
هالعو طسقب هنم ذخأ دقو اّلإ غبص ّلقو .قلتأي صيص رسحني دقو .ظيَ ق سومش الو
عيبر راطمأ اه َ ّبُرَ ت مل ةثوثبملا ريهازألاك وهف هقنوَرو هجابيد من ريشه وي
َ تحنيف اًعابِ ت تبنيو ىرْتَ ت طقسيف هسابل نم ىرع ّ من قصبه ٱنحتات َ ٢رئاس
فلاخي ال هطوقس لبق هتئيهك دوعي ىّتح اً يمان قحالتي ّمث ناصغألا قاروأ
ألوانه ولا يقع لون في غير مكانه وإذا تصفّحت َ شعرة من شعرات قصبه أَرَتْكَ
حمرة اذه ةفص ىلإ لصت فيكو ةّيدَجسَع ةرفص اًنايحأو ةّيدَجْرَ بَز ةرضخ ةراتو ةّيدرو
١م، ي، ونسخة في ش: كذا. ش، ن، ھ: ⟩متقنّع⟨. ٢ش، ن، ي، ھ: كذا. م، ونسخة في
ي: ⟩سالف⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
377 then lays eggs,1 rather than through insemination by a male with a
fluid other than his teardrop, that would not be more marvelous than the
mating of crows through mutual feeding.2 You would think the shafts of
the peacock's feathers silver combs and the
astonishinghalosandsunsthatsproutfromthemcoinsof puregoldandshards of
green emerald! If you were to compare them to the earth's produce, you
would call it a bouquet of spring flowers. If you were to liken them to
garments, you would say they are an embroidered robe, or a beautiful
Yemeni turban. If you were to equate them with jewelry, they would be
bezelled gemstones of different colors rimmed with studs of silver. The
peacock struts, haughty and exultant, it fans its tail and wings and
laughs out loud, relishing its beautiful dress and its many-hued scarf.
But when it looks at its legs, it cries out in pain with a voice that
reveals its need for help and testifies to its real suffering, for its
legs are scrawny, like the legs of a drab cockerel, and a small spur
juts out fromitsshinbone.Initscrest,though,ithasabeautifulcrownof
greenfeathers, while the curve of its neck is shaped like the mouth of a
water-jug, and under- neath, its belly is like the cobalt-blue dye of
Yemen, or like silk cloth draped on a polished mirror. It appears
wrapped in a veil of purest black, except that its luster is so intense
and its sheen so bright that it is as if fresh green is mixed in with
the black. At the slit of its earhole, there is a line like the fine
edge of a reed-pen, snowy white in color like the chamomile flower, and
its whiteness gleams against the blackness that prevails there. There is
hardly a color it does not have a share of, and that has not been
enhanced further by a unique polish, gleam, sheen, and radiance. It
looks like scattered flowers untouched by spring showers or full summer
suns. Sometimes, it sheds its feathers, as if stripping off its clothes;
they fall off, one by one, then grow back altogether. They fall from
their shaft-roots like leaves from a branch, then grow and connect,
until they come back the way they were before; the new colors are no
different, and not a singlecolorappearsinthewrongplace.If
youexaminejustoneof theplumules growing from the shaft, it will display
the red of a rose, the green of an emer- ald, and even at times the
yellow of pure gold. Not even the deepest of minds and the most gifted
of intellects can find a way to describe this creature, so how 1 In
Hindu mythology, peahens self-impregnate by drinking the tears of
peacocks, which are celibate (brahmachārī), and to laud ascetics, Lord
Krishna wears a peacock feather in his crown. 2 In ancient Arab
folklore, crows mate by exchanging inseminating fluid through their
beaks, and their proverb says, ⟨more hidden than the mating of a crow⟩.
Details and caveats in Ḥ 9:270; Jāḥiẓ, Ḥayawān, 3:177, 3:464, 7:244. I
have added "mating" in the translation to clarify this context.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 378 Text and
Translation عمائق الفطن أو تبلغه قرائح العقول أو تستنظم وصفه أقوال
الواصفين وأقلّ أجزائه قد أعجز الأوهام أن تدر كه والألسنة أن تصفه فسبحان
الذي بهر العقول عن وصف خلق جلاه للعيون فأدركته محدودًا مكوّنًا ومؤل ّ فًا
ملوّنًا وأعجز الألسن عن تلخيص صفته وقعد بها عن تأدية نعته١ وسبحان من أدمج
قوائم الذرّة واله َ مَجة إلى ما فوقهما من خلق
الحيتانوالأَفْيِلةووأىعلىنفسهألّايضطربشَب َ حممّاأَولجفيهالروحإلّاوجعلالحِمام
موعده والفناء غايته. 1.163.3منها في صفة الجنة َ فَ زَعَ ل اهنم كل فصوي ام
وحن كبلق رصبب تيمر ولف ت ْ نفسك عن بدائع ما أخرج إلى الدنيا من شهواتها
ولذّاتها وزخارف مناظرها ولذهلت بالفكر في ٱصطفاق أشجار غُيّبت عُروقها في
كُثْبان الم ِ طَ ّرلا ؤلؤللا سئابك قيلعت يفو اهراهنأ لحاوس ىلع كْس ْ ب في ُ
لُ غيفةفلتخمرامثلاكلتعولطواهنانفَأواهجيلاسَع فأكمامهاتجنىمنغيرتكلّففتأتيعلى
مُنية مجتنيها ويطاف على نزّالها في أفنية قصورها بالأعسال المصفّقة والخمور
المروّقة قوم لم تزل الـكرامة تتمادى بهم حتّى حلّوا دار القرار وأمنوا نقلة
الأسفار فلو شغلت قلبك اً قوش كسفن تقهزل ةقنوملا رظانملا كلت نم كيلع مجهي
ام ىلإ لوصولاب عمتسملا اهّيأ إليها ولتحمّلت من مجلسي هذا إلى مجاورة أهل
القبور ٱستعجالًا بها. جعلنا الله وإيّاكم ممّن يسعى بقلبه إلى منازل الأبرار
برحمته. 1.163.4تفسير بعض ما في هذه الخطبة من الغريب قوله عليه السلام
⟩ويؤرّ بملاقحة⟨الأَرّ كناية عن النكاح يقال ⟩أرّ المرأة يؤرّها⟨إذا نكحها.
وقوله ⟩كأنّه قلع داري ّ عنجه نوتيّه⟨القلع شراع السفينة وداري ّ منسوب إلى
دَارِي ْ ن وهي بلدة على البحر يُجلب منها الطيب وعنجه أي عطفه يقال ⟩عنجت
الناقة أَعنِجها عَنْجًا⟨إذا عطفتها والنوتيّ الملّاح. وقوله ⟩ضفّتي جفونه⟨ أراد
جانبي جفونه والضفّتان الجانبان. وقوله ⟩وفلذ الزبرجد⟨الفلذ جمع فلذة وهي
القطعة. وقوله ⟩كبائس اللؤلؤ الرطب⟨الكِباسة العِذْق والعساليج الغصون واحدها
عسلوج. ١ش،ن،م،ھ:كذا.ي: ⟩حقّه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
379 can words be mustered to illustrate it? Even the smallest of its
parts is so splen- did that it exceeds the grasp of imagination and
surpasses the descriptions of tongues. Glory to the one who has dazzled
intellects, who has rendered them incapable of describing a creature
that he placed in the open, where eyes could perceive its outline,
shape, structure, and color! He made tongues incapable of describing it
succinctly and rendered them too weak to give its depiction full due.
Glory to the one who gave strong structures to all creatures, from ants
and gnats to whales and elephants, and who pledged to himself that no
form he has infused with spirit shall move, without death being its end,
and destruction its goal! 1.163.3 From the same oration, describing the
celestial garden: If you gaze with your heart's eye at the wonders
described for you of paradise, your soul will loathe the marvels of this
world, its sensualities, pleasures, and gilded landscapes. You will lose
yourself in heaven's rustling trees whose roots are buried in dunes of
musk on the banks of its rivers, in the clusters of bril- liant pearls
that hang from their branches, in the fruits that burst from their
sepals that can be gathered without effort and delight the gatherer. You
will see the residents of heaven's pavilions and arcades, who are served
pure honey and rich wine; they lived in this world nobly until, at last,
they settled in a permanent home, with no further need of travels and
journeys. If you were to task your heart truly, O listener, with
reaching these wondrous landscapes, your longing soul would leave your
body right now, and you would hasten from this assembly here to the
company of the people of the grave! May God, in his mercy, place us
among those whose hearts strive to reach the abode of the pious! 1.163.4
Raḍī: Explanation of some of the rare words in this oration: As for
ʿAlī's words, "it leaps on the female and inseminates it (wa-yaʾurru
bi-mulāqaḥah)," "leaping on" alludes to copulation; it is said, "he
leaped on the woman, he leaps on her," if he cop- ulates with her. As
for ʿAlī's words, "as though it were a Dārī sail hoisted by a boatman
(ka-annahū qalʿu Dāriyyin ʿanajahu nūṭiyyuhu)," qalʿ is a ship's canvas
sheet, and Dārī is related to Dārīn, a sea town through which perfumes
are imported; "hoisted (ʿanaja)" means he made it turn; it is said "I
hoisted the female camel;" "I hoist it a hoisting," if I make it turn;
nūṭī is a seaman. As for ʿAlī's words, "ḍaffah of its eyelids," he meant
the sides of its eyelids; ḍaffah means side. As for ʿAlī's words, "bits
( filadh) of green emerald," filadh is the plural of fildhah, which
means piece. As for ʿAlī's words, "clus- ters of brilliant pearls
(kabāʾis al-luʾluʾ al-raṭb)," kibāsah (clusters) means bunch, ʿasālīj
(branches) are tree limbs; the singular is ʿuslūj. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 380 Text
and Translation 1.164ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.164.1سَأَ تَ يِ ل َ ّ صغير
كمبكبير فُؤْرَ يْلَومك ْ كبير كمبصغير يفالةّيلهاجلاةافُ جكاونوكتالومك
الدينيتفقّهونولاعناللهتعقلون.كقَيْضِ بَيْضٍ فيأَداحٍ يكونكَسرهاوِزرًاويُخرج .ا ً ّرش
اهُناضِح 1.164.2منها افترقوا بعد أُلْفَتهم وتشتّتوا عن أصلهم فمنهم آخذ بغصن
أينما مال مال معه على أنّ الله َ زَ ق عمتجت امكةّيمأ ينبل موي ّرشل مهعمجيس
ع الخريف يؤل ّ ف الله بينهم ثمّيجعلهم رُ كامًا كركام السحاب ثمّيفتح لهم
أبوابًا يسيلون من مستثارهم كسيل الجنّتين حيث لم تسلم صَرهنَ
نَسّدريملوةمَكَأهلتبثتملوةراقهيلع ّ طودولاحِدابأرضيذعذعهماللهفي نّكميو موق
قوقح موق نم مهب ذخأي﴾ِضْرَأْلا يِف َعيِ باَنَي﴿ مهكـلسيّمث هتيدوأ نوطب لقوم في
ديار قوم. وٱيم الله ليذوبنّ ما في أيديهم بعد العلوّوالتمكين كما تذوب
الأَلْية على النار. 1.164.3أيّها الناس لو لم تتخاذلوا عن نصر الحقّ ولم تهنوا
عن توهين الباطل لم يطمع فيكم مَن ليس مثلـكم ولم ي َ ُ يَ ل يرمعلو ليئارسإ
ينبَهاتَم مُتْهِت مكّنكـل مكيلع يوق نمَوْق ض ْ عَفَنّ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 381 1.164 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.164.1 Let your young
emulate your elders, let your elders nurture your young. Don't be like
churls from the Age of Ignorance who have no understanding of religion
and no comprehension of God's commands. Dealing with you is like
crushing a nest of eggs in the sand---breaking them is a sin but
brooding them produces vipers!2 1.164.2 From the same oration:
Theyscatteredafterhavingcometogetherandmovedawayfromthetreetrunk, but
some will continue to hold fast to the main branch---wherever it bends,
they will bend too.3 Later, God will bring them together, mustering them
like wisps of autumn clouds, on an evil day for the Umayyads. God will
assemble them, then pile them up like winter cloudbanks, then open their
doors, and they will gush out from their source like the flood of theTwo
Gardens,4 no knoll will be safe, and no hillock withstand, neither
strong cliff nor high rock will stem their current. God will send them
into the bellies of the earth's valleys, then make them «flow out in
streams».5 Through them, he will wrest from one group the rights they
had usurped from another, he will settle one group in the abodes of
another. By God, after their time of might and establishment, all that
is in Umayyad hands will melt away as a fat-tail melts on the fire!
1.164.3 People! If you had not held back from supporting right, if you
had not shown weakness in upending wrong,6 these challengers who are not
nearly your match would not have become emboldened against you, and
those who overpowered you would have failed. But you strayed as the
Israelites did. By my life, when I am gone, you will stray more and
more.You turned away from what 1 §1.164.2 is said to have been declaimed
as part of an oration ʿAlī delivered in Medina, pre- sumably in 35/656
at the beginning of his caliphate (Kulaynī, Kāfī, 8:63--65). §1.164.3 is
said to have been declaimed as part of an oration ʿAlī delivered in
Kufa, presumably during his caliphate 35--40/656--661 (Mufīd, Irshād,
1:290). 2 Lit. "brooding them produces evil." I.e., if you crush them
before they have done wrong, you incur sin; if you leave them be, they
may hatch vipers. F 287; Ḥ9:282; B 553; R 2:146--147. 3 The trunk (lit.
root, aṣl) refers to ʿAlī, the branch to his son and successor, Ḥasan.
Ḥ9:284; B 553. 4 The flood of the Two Gardens is a Qurʾanic reference to
the devastating flood of the Maʾrib dam in Yemen that submerged the
Gardens of Sheba. Qurʾan, Sabaʾ 34:15--16; Ḥ9:285; B 554; R 2:149--150.
5 Qurʾan, Zumar 39:21. 6 Reference to Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:139. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 382 Text and
Translation روهظ ءارو ّقحلا متفَ ّلخ اً فاعضأ يدعب نم هْيِّتلا مكـل كم وقطعتم
الأدنى ووصلتم الأبعد وٱعلموا أنّكم إن ٱتّبعتم الداعي لـكم سلك بكم منهاج
الرسول وكُفيتم مؤونة الاعتساف ونبذتم الثقل الفادح عن الأعناق. 1.165ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام في أوّل خلافته إنّ الله سبحانه أنزل كتابًا هاديًا بي ّ ن
فيه الخـير والشرّ فخذوا نهج الخـير تهتدوا وٱصدِفوا عن سَمْت الشرّ تقصدوا.
الفرائض َ الفرائض َ هللا ّنإ ةّنجلا ىلإ مكِّدَؤُ ت هللا ىلإ اهوّدأ َ رُ حلا ىلع
ملسملا ةمرح لّضفو لوهجم ريغ اًمارح مّرح م كلّها وشدّ بالإخلاص والتوحيد حقوق
المسلمين في معاقدها فـ⟩المسلم مَن سَلِم َالمسلمون من لسانه ويده⟨إلّا بالحقّ
ولا يحلّ أذى المسلم إلّا بما يجب. بادروا أمر العامّة وخاصّة أحد كم وهو الموت
فإنّ الناس أمامكم وإنّ الساعة تحدو كم من خلفكم تَخ َ هللا اوقّتا مكُرخآ
مكـلّوأب رظتنُ ي امّنإف اوقَحْلَ ت اوف َ ّف في عباده وبلاده فإنّكم مسؤولون حتّى
عن البِقاع والبهائم أطيعوا الله ولا تعصوه وإذا رأيتم الخـير فخذوا به وإذا
رأيتم الشرّفأعرضوا عنه. 1.166ومن كلام له عليه السلام بعد ما بويع بالخلافة
وقد قال له قوم من الصحابة لو عاقبت َ قومًا ممّن أجلب على عثمان فقال يا
إخوتاه إني لست أجهل ما تعلمون ولـكن كيف لي بقوّة والقوم المجلبون على حدّ
شوكتهم يملـكوننا ولا نملـكهم وهاهُمْ هؤلاء قد ثارت معهم عِبدانكم وٱلتفّت
إليهم al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
383 was right, severed your bonds of kinship from the person who was
close, and forged them with the person who was distant. Know this: If
you follow him who calls you,1 he will lead you on the Messenger's
path---you will be spared the weight of deviation and cast this crushing
yoke from your necks. 1.165 From an oration by ʿAlī at the beginning of
his caliphate:2
Godhasrevealedabooktoguideyouandexplainedinitthedifferencebetween good
and evil. Follow the path of good and you shall be rightly guided. Shun
the path of evil and you shall you remain on the high road. The mandated
rites must be performed; offer them to God, and they will take you to
paradise. God has made certain things illicit, and these are known. He
has placed the sanc- tity of Muslims above all sanctities; through their
devotion and declaration of his oneness, he has bound them, and their
rights, together. A Muslim is some- one from whose tongue and hand all
other Muslims are safe,3 except when it is lawfully required to punish;
it is unlawful to injure a Muslim, except with just cause. People,
hasten to accept death! Death is common to all, yet particular to each
individual. Generations have preceded you, and the dreaded hour now
drives you forward. Lighten your burden of sin, so that you may be quick
to catch up---those who have gone ahead await the arrival of those who
are yet to come. Fear God, and do not injure his servants or his lands.
You are answerable for your actions, even those relating to the earth
and to cattle. Obey God and do not sin. If you see an opportunity to do
good, take it. If you see a chance to do evil, shun it. 1.166 From an
address by ʿAlī following the people's pledge to him as caliph, respond-
ing to some of the Prophet's Companions who urged, "You should punish
the people who conspired to kill ʿUthmān." ʿAlī answered:4 Brothers, I
am not unmindful of what you know, but how do I enforce retri- bution
when the people who conspired to kill ʿUthmān are so powerful? They
control us, we don't control them! Here they are now, your own slaves
having risen up with them, as well as the Bedouins. They are mixed in
among you and impose their will. Do you see a way to carry out any part
of your plan? 1 Refers to ʿAlī himself. F 281. 2 35/656, in Medina.
Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 4:436) says this was ʿAlī's first oration as caliph. 3
Hadith attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §1.134. 4 Delivered
in 35/656 in Medina (Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:437). It is reported that ʿAlī
assembled the people and said, "Let ʿUthmān's killers stand up," and
most people stood up in solidarity with the assaulters. (B 556). On
ʿAlī's initial dealings with ʿUthmān's killers, see Ḥ9:293--294.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 384 Text and
Translation أعرابكم١ وهم خلالـكم يسومونكم ما شاؤوا وهل ترون موضعًا لقدرة
على شيء تريدونه إنّ هذاالأمرأمرُجاهليّةٍوإنّ لهؤلاءالقوممادّةإنّ
الناسمنهذاالأمرإذاحُرّكعلى
أمورفرقةٌترىماترونوفرقةترىمالاترونوفرقةلاترىهذاولاهذافٱصبرواحتّى يهدأ
الناس وتقع القلوب مواقعها وتؤخذ الحقوق مُسْمَحة فٱهدأوا عنّي وٱنظروا ماذا
يأتيكم به أمري ولا تفعلوا ف َ عْلة ت ُ ضعضع قوّة وت ُ ّ لذو اً نْهَو ثروتو
ةّنم طقس ة. وسأمسك الأمر ما ٱستمسك وإذا لم أجد ب ُ .⟨ّيَكـلا ءادلا رِخآ⟩ـف ا
ً ّد 1.167ومن خطبة له عليه السلام عند مسير أصحاب الجمل إلى البصرة إنّ
اللهبعثرسولًاهاديًابكتابناطقوأمرقائملايهلكعنهإلّاهالكوإنّ المبتدَعات ِ لهملا
ّنه تاه َ ّبشملا كات إلّا ما حفظ٢ الله منها وإنّ في سلطان الله عصمة لأمر
كم٣ فأعطوه طاعتكم غير مَلومة ولا مُستكر َ هٍ بها والله لتفعل ُ نّ أو لينقُل َ
نّ الله عنكم سلطان الإسلام ثمّلا ينقله إليكم أبدًا حتّى يأرِزَالأمر إلى غير
ةطْخَس ىلع اوؤَ لامَ ت دق ءالؤه ّنإ .مك عطقنٱ يأرلا اذه ةلايَ ف ىلع اومّمت نإ
مهّنإف مكتعامج ىلع فخأ مل ام ربصأسو يترامإ نظام المسلمين وإنّما طلبوا هذه
الدنيا حسدًا لمن أفاءها الله عليه فأرادوا ردّ الأمور على .هتّنسل شْعَ ّنلاو
هّقحب مايقلاو هلوسر ةريسو هللا باتكب لمعلا انيلع مكـلو .اهرابدأ 1.168برقاّ
ملةرصبلالهأنمموقهلسرأدقوبرعلاضعبهبمّلكمالسلاهيلعهلمالكنمو عليه السلام
منها يعلم لهم منه حقيقة حاله مع أصحاب الجمل لتزول الشبهة من نفوسهم. فبي
ّ ن ١م،ي،ونسخةفيش،ھ:كذا.ش،ن،ھ: ⟩أغرار كم⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا. أصلم:
⟩عصم⟨. ٣ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩لربّكم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 385 ʿUthmān's killing is an act from the Age of Ignorance
and its perpetrators have strong support. If an order were given now,
you would see the people divide into three groups: one would agree with
you, another would think the opposite, and a third would see neither the
one nor the other. Be patient, let the people calm down and hearts
settle, then justice can be exacted more easily. Step back and see what
my rule brings---don't be impulsive in doing something that will wreck
your power, ruin your force, and bequeath weakness and humiliation. I
will hold things together as long as they will stay together. If I am
left with no alternative, then, when afflictedby an incurable disease,
⟨cauterizing is the last resort⟩.1 1.167 From an oration by ʿAlī in the
lead-up to the Battle of the Camel, when his oppo- nents marched on
Basra:2 God sent a Messenger, a guide, with a book that speaks and an
established religion.3 Whoever dies having strayed from them will
perish, for dubious and heretical innovations bring perdition, except
when God protects from their harm. Submitting to God's authority
safeguards your religion. Render him obe- dience, then, without blame or
force. By God, you must do this, else he will remove Islam's authority
from your control and never give it back, and rule will pass to another
group! These individuals have banded to condemn my com- mand, and I will
be patient for as long as I don't fear for your concord---if they
continue to pursue this errant course, the Muslims' stability will
crumble.They seek this world and envy those to whom God has awarded it,
they wish to turn these affairs back on their heels. My promise to you
is this: I shall act on the Book of God and the practice of his
Messenger. I shall uphold his right and revive his Sunnah. 1.168 From
ʿAlī's address to an Arab sent by a group of Basrans when he approached
their city, in the lead-up to the Battle of the Camel, to find out the
truth of ʿAlī's deal- ings with his opponents, because they were unsure
of who was in the right. When ʿAlī explained what had transpired, the
man accepted that he, ʿAlī, was in the right. ʿAlī 1 Ar. ākhir al-dāʾ
al-kayy, proverb referring to battle as the final option; also rendered:
ākhir
al-dawāʾal-kayy,⟨thefinalmedicineiscauterization⟩,orākhiral-ṭibbal-kayy,⟨thefinaltreat-
ment is cauterization⟩. Etiology in F 283--284; Ibn Manẓūr, Lisān,
s.v. "K-W-Y." 2 Delivered in Medina in 36/656, while preparing to march
to Iraq, urging the Medinans to mobilize. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:445--446. 3
Ar. amr, translated here as "religion," lit. "affair," used twice more
in this passage, once in the plural umūr. In addition to the faith of
Islam, the word also simultaneously denotes its political entity; I have
used "caliphate" to translate the second instance, and "affairs" to
bring together both meanings in the third instance. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 386 Text
and Translation له عليه السلام من أمره معهم ما علم به أنّه على الحقّ ثمّقال
له بايع فقال إن ّ ي رسول قومي ولا أحدث حدثًا دونهم حتّى أرجع إليهم فقال
عليه السلام١ أرأيتلوأنّ
الذينوراءكبعثوكرائدًاتبتغيلهممساقطالغيثفرجعتإليهموأخبرتهم عن الكَل َ أ
والماء فخالفوا إلى المعاطش والمجادب ما كنت صانعًا.
قالكنتتاركهمومخالفهمإلىالكلأوالماء.فقاللهعليهالسلامفٱمددإذًايدك.فقالالرجل
فوالله ما ٱستطعت أن أمتنع عند قيام الحجّة عليّ فبايعته عليه السلام. والرجل
يعرف بكُليب .ّيمْرَ جلا 1.169نيّفصب موقلا ءاقل ىلع مزع اّ مل مالسلا هيلع همالك
نمو اللّٰهمّ رب ّ السقف المرفوع والجوّ المكفوف الذي جعلته مَغيضًا لليل والنّهار
ومجرى للشمسوالقمرومختل َ فًاللنجومالسيّارةوجعلتسكّانهسِبْطًامنملائكتكلاي َ
سأَمون من عبادتك ورب امو ماعنألاو ّماوَهلل اًجَرْدَمو مانألل اًرارق اهتلعج يتلا
ضرألا هذه َ ّ برو ىري ال امو ىرُ ي اّمم ىصحي ال قلخللو اًداتوأ ضرألل اهتلعج
يتلا يساورلا لابجلا َ ّ ٱعتمادًا إن أظهرتَنا على عدوّنا فجنّبنا البغي وسدّدنا
للحقّ وإن أظهرتهم علينا فٱرزقنا الشهادة وٱعصمنا من الفتنة. أين المانع
للذِّمار والغائر عند نزول الحقائق من أهل الحِفاظ. العارُوراءكم والجنّة
أَمامكم. لمجلا لبق ّيمرجلا بيلكل لاق اّ مل مالسلا هيلع همالك نمو⟩ :ھ ،ي ،ن
.اذك :ش لصأو ،م١ بايع.فقالإن ّ يرسولقوميولاأحدثحدثًادونهم⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
387 then said to him, "Pledge the oath of allegiance!" to which he
replied, "I am my people's emissary, and can do nothing on my own; I
have to first return to them." ʿAlī then said:1 If the people you
represent had sent you as a scout to find out where the rains are
falling, and, if, when you told them where to find grass and water, they
went againstyourrecommendationandheadedforparched,drought-hitlands,what
would you do then? The man replied, "I would leave them and proceed to
where there was grass and water." ʿAlī declared, "In that case, extend
your hand!" The man said later, "By God, I was not able to refuse when
the case was so clearly proven, and I pledged him allegiance." The man's
name was Kulayb al-Jarmī. 1.169 From ʿAlī's prayer when he had resolved
to fight the enemy at Ṣiffīn:2 God! O Lord of the lofty sky and layers
of air, you made the sky and air the marshland into which night and day
are absorbed, the course where the sun and moon orbit, and thespace
throughwhichthemovingplanetssail.Youpop- ulated it with tribes of your
angels, who never tire of your worship. O Lord of this earth, you made
the earth a home for humans, a place for insects to crawl
andcattletoroam,andahabitatforcountlessothercreatures,seenandunseen.
OLordof themightymountains,youmadethemountainsanchorsfortheearth and a
refuge for your creatures. Hear our prayer: If you grant us victory over
our enemy, then hold us back from treachery and direct us to follow the
truth. If you grant them victory over us, then honor us with martyrdom
and save us from sedition. People, where are your doughty fighters who
would defend honor and guard families with zeal when the blows of war
descend? Behind you lies shame! Before you is paradise! 1 This event
took place a little before the Battle of the Camel, after Ṭalḥah and
Zubayr had entered Basra, and ʿAlī, on his way to confront them in
Basra, was encamped nearby in Dhū Qār. Mufīd, Jamal, 156, after Wāqidī;
full account in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:490--492. 2 Intoned just before the
battle at Ṣiffīn, 37/657. Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 232;Ṭabarī,Tārīkh,
5:14-- 15. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 388 Text and
Translation 1.170ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.170.1ضرأ الوًءامسٌءامس هنع يراوُ
ت ال يذلا هلل دمحلا ٌ أرضًا. 1.170.2منها وقال لي قائل إنّك على هذا الأمر
يا ٱبن أبي طالب لحريص فقلت بل أنتم والله أحرص وأبعدوأناأخص
يهجونوبرضتوهنيبوينيبنولوحتمتنأويلا ً ّقحتبلطامّنإوبرقأو ّ دونه. فلمّا ق َ
ر َ عت ُ ه بالحجّة في الملأ الحاضرين هَب َ ّ ١ لا يدري ما يجيبني به.
1.170.3اللّٰهمّ إن ّ ي أستعديك على قريش ومن أعانهم فإنّهم قطعوا رحمي وصغّروا
عظيم منزلتي وأجمعوا على منازعتي أمرًا هو لي ثمّقالوا ألا إنّ في الحقّ أن
تأخذه وفي الحقّ أن تتر كه. 1.170.4منها في ذ كر أصحاب الجمل فخرجوايَج ُ
رّونحرمةرسولاللهصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهكماتُج َ رّالأَمَةعندش ِ رائهامتوجّهينبها َ
بَ حفةرصبلاىلإ سانساءهمافيبيوتهماوأبرزاحَبيسرسولاللهلهماولغيرهمافيجيشما
منهمرجلإلّاوقدأعطانيالطاعةوسمحليبالبيعةطائعًاغيرمُكر َ هٍ.فقدمواعلىعامليبها
وخزّانبيتمالالمسلمينوغيرهممنأهلهافقتلواطائفةصبرًاوطائفةغدرًا.فواللهلولم
١م،ي،ونسخةفيھ:كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ: ⟩بُه ِ ت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 389 1.170 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.170.1 Praise God, from
whose vision one sky does not conceal another, one earth does not
conceal another. 1.170.2 From the same oration:
Someonesaidtome,"Howyoucovetthecaliphate,sonof AbūṬālib!"Iretorted, "No,
by God, you are more covetous and farther away from it, while I am
closer and more worthy! What I seek is my right, and you are blocking me
from it, you are hitting me in the face and pushing me away!" When I
struck him with this clear argument in front of the whole group, he was
dumbstruck and could find no answer. 1.170.3 God, I ask your help
against Quraysh and their supporters. They have severed the bonds of my
kinship, demeaned my lofty station, and banded together to wrest my
right from me. Then they say, "A right may be taken, a right may also be
abandoned."2 1.170.4 From the same oration describing ʿAlī's opponents
at the Battle of the Camel:3 They marched toward Basra dragging the
Messenger's wife with them like a
slave-girldraggedforsale,havingveiledtheirownwomentotheirhomes,while
exposing the Messenger's wife to their eyes and the eyes of others in
their army. There was not a single individual in that army, moreover,
who had not sworn obedience to me, who had willingly, without coercion,
pledged allegiance to me. They advanced against my governor in Basra, as
well as the custodians of the public treasury and other townspeople, and
they killed a number after cap- turing them, and several more whom they
tricked with their treachery. By God, if they had purposefully killed
even a single Muslim without a crime to justify 1 In Basra, in 36/656,
soon after the Battle of the Camel (reference to the battle in
§1.170.4). §1.170.4 is cited as an answer given during an oration in the
mosque in Basra, a few days after the battle (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 228);
other parts of the oration as cited in ibid., 221--233, are listed in
the note to §1.23. The reference in §1.170.2--3 is to the Shūrā Council
that elected ʿUthmān in 23/644. Ḥ9:305. 2 Similar lines in §1.215.1. 3
"They" are Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, "the Messenger's wife" is ʿĀʾishah. For
context of the Battle of the Camel and ʿĀʾishah's role, see Ḥ9:310--327;
B 561--564; F 288--289. ʿAlī's governor in Basra was ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf,
a Companion of the Prophet. Similar lines in §1.215.2. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 390 Text and
Translation يصيبوا من المسلمين إلّا رجل ً ا واحدًا معتمدين لقتله بلا جرمٍ
جرّه لَح َ لّ لي قتل ذلك الجيش كلّه إذ حضروه فلم ينكروا ولم يدفعوا عنه بلسان
ولا يد. دع ما أنّهم قد قتلوا من المسلمين مثل العدّة التي دخلوا بها عليهم.
1.171ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.171.1أمين وحيه وخاتم رسله وبشير رحمته
ونذير نقمته. 1.171.2أيّها الناس إنّ أحقّ الناس بهذا الأمر أقواهم عليه
وأعلمهم١ بأمر الله فيه فإن شغب شاغب ٱستعتب فإن أبى قوتل. ولعمري لئن كانت
الإمامة لا تنعقد حتّى يحضرهاعامّةالناسماإلىذلكسبيلولـكنّ
أهلهايحكمونعلىمنغابعنهاثمّليس للشاهد أن يرجع ولا للغائب أن يختار. ألا وإن
ّ ي أقاتل رجلين رجل ً ا ٱدّعى ما ليس له وآخر منع الذي عليه. أوصيكم بتقوى
الله فإنّها خير ما تواصى العباد به وخير عواقب اّلإ ملعلا اذه لمحي الو
ةلبقلا لهأ نيبو مكنيب برحلا باب حتُ ف دقو .هللا دنع رومألا أهل البصر
والصبر والعلم بمواضع الحقّ فٱمضوا لما تؤمرون به وقفوا عندما تنهون عنه .اًرَ
يِغ هنوركنت رمأ ّلك عم انل ّنإف اونّيبتت ىّتح رمأ يف اولجعت الو
١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩أعملهم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
391 his killing, it would be lawful for me to execute their whole army,
for they all stood by without protest. They failed to defend any of the
innocent victims with their hands or even with their tongues! But, in
fact, they have not just killed one---they have killed a great many
Muslims, as many as the numbers with which they themselves entered the
city. 1.171 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.171.1 Muḥammadwasthetrusteeof
God'srevelation,thesealof hisprophets, the herald of his mercy, and the
warner ahead of his punishment. 1.171.2 People!The individual most
worthy to assume the mantle of leadership is the one who is most capable
of carrying its trust, most knowledgeable about God's command. After the
pledge, if a rebel revolts, he is to be persuaded to return to the fold,
and if he refuses, he is to be fought. By my life, if you are saying
that the imamate can be pledged only with the whole populace in atten-
dance, there is no way to do this! Instead, the leaders decide on behalf
of the absent,2 and afterward, those who were present have no right to
rescind their pledge, while the absent have no right to choose another.
Hark! I shall fight two kinds of men, the man who claims what does not
belong to him, and another who refuses to render his due. I counsel you
to be conscious of God---this is the best counsel his servants can give
one another, and the way that obtains the best outcome before God. Hear
me! War has commenced between you and people of the Qiblah,3 and our
banner can be carried only by people of percep- tion and fortitude,
those who know where truth resides. Enact what you are commanded, then,
and desist from what you are forbidden. Do not hasten to an action until
you have clarity, for anything you discover to be wrong I will change.4
1 Likely delivered just before or soon after the Battle of the Camel in
36/656: §1.171.3 is included by Ḥarrānī (Tuḥaf, 183--184) in an oration
that he says ʿAlī delivered "when some people expressed unhappiness at
his levelling of stipends among the people," which fits with what the
sources say of Ṭalḥah's and Zubayr's source of dissatisfaction with
ʿAlī's rule. §1.171.2 (and §1.83.3) are recorded by Minqarī (Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 10) and Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī (Akhbār 152--153) as part of
ʿAlī's first Friday sermon in Kufa. 2 Ar. ahlahā, lit. "its people"; my
translation, "their leaders," is based on B 566; Ḥ9:329, which interpret
the phrase as "the people of loosening and binding" (ahl al-ḥall
wa-l-ʿaqd) and "scholars" (ʿulamāʾ). 3 I.e., fellow Muslims. The Qiblah
is the direction of the Kaʿbah in Mecca that all Muslims face in ritual
prayer. 4 The context for this last statement is ʿUthmān's unwillingness
to make changes in his admin- istration, even when its wrongs were
brought to his notice. B 566. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 392 Text and
Translation 1.171.3ألا وإنّ هذه الدنيا التي أصبحتم تتمنّونها وترغبون فيها
وأصبحت تغضبكم وترضيكم ليست بدار كم ولا منزلـكم الذي خلقتم له ولا الذي
دعيتم إليه ألا وإنّها ليست بباقية لـكم ولا تبقون عليها وهي وإن غرّتكم منها
فقد حذّرتكم شرّها فدَعُوا غرورها لتحذيرها وإطماعها لتخويفها وسابقوا فيها إلى
الدار التي دعيتم إليها وٱنصرفوا بقلوبكم دحأ ّنَ ّ نِ ـخَي الو اهنع كم خَنِين
الأَمة على ما زوي عنه منها وٱستتمّوا نعمة الله عليكم بالصبر
علىطاعةاللهوالمحافظةعلىماٱستحفظكممنكتابه.ألاوإنّهلايضرّكمتضييعشيءمن دنياكم
بعد حفظكم قائمة دينكم ألا وإنّه لا ينفعكم بعد تضييع دينكم شيء حافظتم عليه
من أمر دنياكم. أخذ الله بقلوبنا وقلوبكم إلى الحقّ وألهمنا وإيّاكم الصبر.
1.172ومن كلام له عليه السلام في معنى طلحة بن عبيد الله ّ بر يندعو ام ىلع
انأو برضلاب بّهرأ الو برحلاب د َ ّدَهُأ امو تنك دق ي من النصر َ لاطي نأ نم
اً فوخ اّلإ نامثع مدب بلطلل اًدّرجتم لجعتسٱ ام هللاو ب بدمه لأنّه مَظِنّته ِ لاغُ
ي نأ دارأف هنم هيلع صرحأ موقلا يف نكي ملو ط بما أجلب فيه ليلبس الأمر
ويقع ناكامكاً ملاظناّفعنبٱناكنئلثالثنمةدحاونامثعرمأيفعنصامهللاوو. ّكشلا
يزعم لقد كان ينبغي له أن يوازر قاتليه أو١ ينابذ ناصريه ولئن كان مظلومًا
لقد كان ْ يِ هِنْهَنُ ملا نم نوكي نأ هل يغبني ن عنه والمعذّرين فيه ولئن كان في
شكّ من الخصلتين لقد كان ينبغي له أن يعتزله وير كد جانبًا ويدع الناس معه
فما فعل واحدة من الثلاث وجاء بأمر لم يعرف بابه ولم تسلم معاذيره.
١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩وأن⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
393 1.171.3 Hark my words! This world that you covet and desire, that
causes you anger and pleasure, is not your home, it is not the residence
for which you have been created or to which you have been called. Listen
to me! It will not remain for you, nor will you remain in it. While it
tempts you with its allures, it also warns you of its evil, so heed its
warnings and threats, and shun its temptations and enticements. Turn
your heart away and race to the home to which you are called. Let no one
among you sniffle like a young slave- girl over anything he has lost of
this world! Instead, seek the completion of God's blessings by being
patient in the path of his obedience and holding fast to God's Book.
Hark and listen! Nothing you surrender of this world will harm you if
you secure the principles of your faith! Hark again! Nothing you secure
of your worldly affairs will benefit you if you surrender your faith!
May God guide our hearts toward the truth. May he grant us patience in
adver- sity. 1.172 From an address by ʿAlī about Ṭalḥah ibn
ʿUbaydallāh:1 Ihaveneverbeenonetobeshakenbythreatsof
battleorpanickedbynoticesof attack. I await the victory my Lord has
promised me. By God, Ṭalḥah only has- tened to draw his sword and demand
vengeance for ʿUthmān's blood because he feared that the same call was
going to be made against him! He is impli- cated in this matter, for
none among the people was more avid for it than he---he wishes to create
confusion and has raised a tumult about it only in order to muddy the
issue and raise doubt. By God, he took none of the three proper courses
in the crisis around ʿUthmān: If Ibn ʿAffān was an oppressor, as Ṭalḥah
believed, he should have backed those who killed him or at least
rebuffed his supporters. If ʿUthmān was a victim, Ṭalḥah should have
been among those who defended him and pleaded his cause. And if he was
in doubt about both choices, he should have dissociated from ʿUthmān and
remained on the sidelines, leaving the people to do their will. But he
did none of this--- he followed a path whose entryway was unsanctioned
and whose justifications were unsound. 1 In Medina in 36/656, soon after
ʿAlī's accession to the caliphate, when news arrived that Ṭal- ḥah and
Zubayr were on their way to Basra to recruit an army to fight him (B
567; on Ṭalḥah's misconduct with ʿUthmān, see Ḥ10:5--9; B 568). Kulaynī
(Kāfī, 5:53) quotes the first few lines in an oration at the Battle of
the Camel outside Basra in 36/656. The first line is similar to the
penultimate line of §1.22. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 394 Text and
Translation 1.173ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أيّها الغافلون غير المغفول عنهم
والتاركون والمأخوذ منهم ما لي أراكم عن الله ذاهبين وإلى غيره راغبين
كأنّكم ن َ عَمٌ أراح بها سائم إلى مرعًى وبيّ ومشرب دوي ّ إنّما هي كالمعلوفة
للم ُ دى لا تعرف ماذا يراد بها إذا أحسن إليها تحسب يومها دهرها وشِب َ عها
أمرها.واللهلوشئتأنأخبركلّ رجلمنكمبمخرجهومَولِ جهوجميعشأنهلفعلتولـكن ّ لص
هللا لوسرب َ ّيِف اورفكت نأ فاخأ ى الله عليه وآله ألا وإن ّ ي مُفضيه إلى
الخاصّة ممّن دهع دقو اً قداص اّلإ قطنأ ام قلخلا ىلع هافطصٱو ّقحلاب هثعب
يذلاو هنم كلذ نَمؤي ّرمي اً ئيش ىقبأ امو رمألا اذه لآمو وجني نم ىجنمو كلهي
نم كلهمبو هّلك كلذب ّيلإ على رأسي إلّا أفرغه في أذنيّ وأفضى به إليّ. أيّها
الناس إن ّ ي والله ما أحثّكم على طاعة إلّا وأسبقكم إليها ولا أنهاكم عن
معصية إلّا وأتناهى قبلـكم عنها. 1.174ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.174.1انتفعوا ببيان الله وٱتّعظوا بمواعظ الله وٱقبلوا نصيحة الله فإنّ
الله قد أعذر إليكم بالجليّةوٱتّخذعليكمالحجّةوبي ّ
هذهاوبنتجتوهذهاوعبّتتلههراكمولامعألانمهَ ّباحَممكـلن فإنّ رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآلهكان يقول ⟩إنّ الجنّة حُجبت بالمكاره وإنّ النار حُفّت بالشهوات⟨.
وٱعلموا أنّه ما من طاعة الله شيء إلّا يأتي في كرهٍوما من معصية الله شيء
إلّايأتيفيشهوةفرحماللهرجل ً انزع١عنشهوتهوقمعهوىنفسهفإنّ هذهالنفسأبعد
شيءمَنزَعًاوإنّهالاتزالتنزعإلىمعصيةفيهوى.وٱعلمواعباداللهأنّ المؤمنلايصبح ولا
يمسي إلّا ونفسه ظَنون عنده فلا يزال زاريًا عليها ومستزيدًا لها. فكونوا
كالسابقين قبلـكم والماضين أمامكم ق َ .لزانملا ّيَط اهوَوَطو لحارلا ضيوقت
ايندلا نم اوضَ ّو ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩...فيشهوةفنزعرجل⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 395 1.173 From an oration by ʿAlī: O heedless people who go
not unheeded! Spurners of good who will soon be brought to account! How
is it that I see you moving away from God and placing your hopes in
another? As though you were a herd of sheep driven to a plague- ridden
pasture and contaminated water! Or beasts fattened for the knife, who
have no idea what lies in store for them, who, if treated well, think
the remain- der of their days to be as long as an age, and that all they
must do is fill their bellies! By God, if I wished to inform each of you
about his exit, his entry, and all that he will encounter, I would do
so, but I fear that you will abandon God's Messenger for me. Harken to
me! I shall pass on its knowledge to individuals who are to be trusted
in this regard. I swear by the one who sent Muḥammad with truth and
placed him above all people, I never speak anything but the truth!
Muḥammad bequeathed me this knowledge and told me about the per- ishing
of all who will perish, the saving of all who will be saved, and the end
result of this affair. He left no question that might occur to me
without pouring its secrets into my ear and communicating to me its
mysteries. People! By God, I do not urge you to an act of obedience
without preceding you to it! I do not forbid you from an act of
disobedience without staying away from it myself! 1.174 From an oration
by ʿAlī:1 1.174.1 Profit from God's revelation, heed God's counsels, and
accept God's direction, for God has cautioned you with clear guidance
and brought you con- vincing proofs. He has shown you what he likes and
what he dislikes so that you may follow the former and shun the latter.
His Messenger used to say, ⟨Paradise is veiled by torments, while the
Fire is surrounded by delights.⟩2 Know that every act of obedience to
God is achieved with toil, while every act of disobe- dience to God
comes in the guise of pleasure. May God have mercy on the man who roots
out his desires and crushes the passions of his appetitive soul.3 This
appetite ranges far, and, urged on by its desires, it never stops urging
you to acts of disobedience.Servantsof
God!Knowthatabelieverwakesupeverymorning and sleeps every night wary of
his gluttonous soul, continually rebuking it and seeking to provision
himself for the hereafter. Be like those who preceded you, who died
before you. They pulled up their tent-pegs from this world as those
striking camp and traversed through it as in the successive stages of a
journey. 1 One of ʿAlī's first orations after becoming caliph, delivered
in Medina in 35/656. B 573. 2 Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §3.1. 3
Ar.nafs,lit."soul"or"self,"translatedhereas"appetitivesoul,"referstothebase,animalfaculty
of the human soul, «Indeed, the soul urges one to evil.» Qurʾan, Yūsuf
12:53. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 396 Text and
Translation 1.174.2وٱعلموا أنّ هذا القرآن هو الناصح اّلذي لا ي َ غُش ّ
والهادي الذي لا ي ُ ضلّ والمحدّث الذي لا يكذب وما جال َ س َ هذا القرآن أحد
إلّا قام عنه بزيادة أو نقصان زيادةٍفي هدى أو نقصان من عمى. وٱعلموا أنّه ليس
على أحد بعد القرآن من فاقة ولا لأحد قبل القرآن من غنى فٱستشفوه من
أدوائكم وٱستعينوا به على لَأوَائكم فإنّ فيه شفاء من أكبر الداء وهو الـكفر
والنفاق والغيّ والضلال فٱسألوا الله به وتوجّهوا إليه ١لئاقو ع َ ّفشم عفاش
هّنأ اوملعٱو .هلثمب هللا ىلإ دابعلا هّجوت ام هّنإ هقلخ هب اولأست الو هّبحب َ
حَم نمو هيف عِّفُش ةمايقلا موي نآرقلا هل عفش نم هّنأو ق َ ّدصم لَ به القرآن
يوم القيامة صُدِّق عليه فإنّه ينادي منادٍ يوم القيامة ألا إنّ كلّ حارث مبتلى في
حرثه وعاقبة عمله غير حَرَثة القرآن فكونوا من حرثته وأتباعه وٱستدل ّ وه على
ربّكم وٱستنصحوه على أنفسكم وٱتّهموا عليه آراءكم وٱستغِشّوا فيه أهواءكم.
1.174.3العملَ العملَ ثمّالنهايةَالنهايةَوالاستقامةَالاستقامةَثمّالصبرَ الصبرَ
والورعَ ةياغ مالسإلل ّنإو مكمَ لَعب اودتهٱف اً مَ لَ ع مكـل ّنإو مكتياهن ىلإ
اوهتنٱف ةياهن مكـل ّنإ .َعرولا فٱنتهوا إلى غايته وٱخرجوا إلى الله ممّا
ٱفترض عليكم من حقّه وبي ّ ن لـكم من وظائفه. أنا شاهد لـكم وحَجيج يوم
القيامة عنكم. 1.174.4ألا وإنّ القَدَر السابق قد وقع والقضاء الماضي قد تورّد
وإن ّ ي متكلّم ب ِ عِدة الله َ تْسا َ ّمُثُ هّٰللااَنُ ّبَراوُ لاَ ق َنيذلا َ ّن ِإ﴿
ىلاعتهللالاقهتّجحو ِ هْيَ لَ ع ُل َ ّزَ نَتَتاوُماَق مُالْمَل َ ائ ِ اوُ فاَ خَتا َ
ّلَأُةَك َ عوُ تْمُتنُكيتلاِةَ ّنَ جْلاِباوُرِشْبَأَواوُ نَ زْحَتاَلَو ُ هَ ّللااَنُ ّبَر﴿
متلقدقو﴾َنوُد ﴾فٱستقيمواعلىكتابه الواهيفاوعدتبتالواهنماوقُ رمَ
تالّمث.هتدابعنمةحلاصلاةقيرطلاىلعوهرمأجاهنمىلعو .ةمايقلا موي هللا دنع مهب
عطقنم قورُ ملا لهأ ّنإف اهنع اوفلاخت ١ش،م،ي،ھ،ونسخةفين:كذا.ن،ونسخةفيش:
⟩ماحل⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
397 1.174.2 Know also that the Qurʾan is a counselor that never
deceives, a guide that never leads astray, and a speaker that never
lies. Whoever sits down with this Qurʾan gets up with either an increase
or a decrease: an increase of guid- ance or a decrease of blindness.
Know, furthermore, that no person will remain poor after accepting the
Qurʾan and that no person will be wealthy before accepting it. Seek its
cure for your ailments and its support against your hard- ships, for it
holds the cure for the greatest ailments of all---unbelief, hypocrisy,
gross error, and miscreance. Beseech God through its sanctity and turn
to him through your love for it. Do not misuse it to seek favors from
God's creatures. Nothing equals the Qurʾan in helping you to turn to
God. Know, too, that the Qurʾan is an intercessor that is heeded and a
speaker that is believed. Those for whom it intercedes on judgment day
will have their plea accepted, while those it accuses on judgment day
will have the claim against them upheld. Indeed, a crier will cry out on
judgment day: "Hark! Every tiller's crop and all the fruits of his labor
have been destroyed, except that of the tillers of the Qurʾan!" Be,
therefore, among the Qurʾan's tillers and followers! Secure it as the
guide to your Lord, accept it as a counselor who restrains your
appetites, and distrust any of your opinions that contradict its
teachings. Learn from the Qurʾan and know that your passions deceive.
1.174.3 Deeds,deeds!Goals,goals!Rectitude,rectitude!Endurance,endurance!
Ethics, ethics! Truly, you have a goal, so proceed toward it! You have
been given a signpost, so be guided by it! Islam has an objective, so
race toward it! Stand before God having cleared the dues he has
mandated, having performed the duties he has required. Do this, and I
shall bear witness on your behalf and plead your cause on judgment day.
1.174.4 Hark! The preordained commandment has come to pass, and the pre-
destined event has arrived at its waterhole. Let me tell you of God's
promise and his proof,for hehassaid,«as forthose
whoproclaimthat"OurLordisGod," and then remain upright, angels come to
them, saying, "do not fear and do not grieve, but rejoice, for paradise,
as promised, is yours!"»1 You have proclaimed, «Our Lord is God.» Now
remain upright in the manner shown by his Book. Fol- low the straight
path of his command and the pious road of his worship. Do not abandon
the faith, do not introduce heresies, and do not transgress, for those
who abandon the faith will be severed from God on judgment day. 1
Qurʾan, Fuṣṣilat 41:30. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 398 Text and
Translation 1.174.5ثمّ إيّاكم وتهزيعَ الأخلاق وتصريفها وٱجعلوا اللسان واحدًا
وَلْي َ نِزَ تْخ الرجل لسانه فإنّ هذا اللسان جَموح بصاحبه والله ما أرى عبدًا
يتّقي تقوى تنفعه حتّى يخـتزنلسانهفإنّ لسانالمؤمنمنوراءقلبهوإنّ
قلبالمنافقمنوراءلسانهلأنّ المؤمن ّنإو هاراو ا ً ّرش ناك نإو هادبأ اًريخ
ناك نإف هسفن يف هرّبدت مالكب مّلكتي نأ دارأ اذإ المنافق يتكلّم بما أتى على
لسانه لا يدري ماذا له وماذا عليه. وقد قال رسول الله صل ّ ى اللهعليه وآله
⟩لا يستقيم إيمان عبد حتّى يستقيم قلبه ولا يستقيم قلبه حتّى يستقيم لسانه⟨.
فمن ٱستطاع منكم أن يلقى الله سبحانه وهو نقيّ الراحة من دماء المسلمين
وأموالهم سليم اللسان من أعراضهم فليفعل. 1.174.6وٱعلموا عباد الله أنّ
المؤمن يستحلّ العام ما ٱستحلّ عامًا أوّلَ ويحرّم العام ما ام لالحلا ّنكـلو
مكيلع مّرُح اّمم اً ئيش مكـل ّلحُي ال سانلا ثدحأ ام ّنأو لّوأ اًماع مّرح أحلّ
الله والحرام ما حرّم الله. فقد جرّبتم الأمور وضَرّستموها ووُعظتم بمن كان
قبلـكم وضربت الأمثال لـكم ودعيتم إلى الأمر الواضح فلا ي َ َ ي الو ُ ّمَصَأ
اّلإ كلذ نع ُ ّمَص عمى عن ذلك إلّا أعمى ومن لم ينفعه الله بالبلاء والتجارب
لم ينتفع بشيء من العِظة وأتاه التقصير١ من أمامه حتّى يعرف ما أنكر وينكر ما
عرف. وإنّما الناس رجلان مُتّبعٌ ش ِ رعةً ومبتدع بدعة ليس معه من الله سبحانه
برهان سنّة ولا ضياء حجّة. 1.174.7وإنّ الله سبحانه لم يعظ أحدًا بمثل هذا
القرآن فإنّه حبل الله المتين وسببه٢ الأمين وفيه ربيع القلب وينابيع العلم
وما للقلب جلاء غيره مع أنّه قد ذهب المتذ كّرون ّنإف هنع اوبهذٱف ا ً ّرش
متيأر اذإو هيلع اونيعأف اًريخ متيأر اذإف .نوسانتملاو نوسانلا يقبو
رسولاللهصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهكانيقول⟩ياٱبنآدمٱعملالخـيرودَعالشرّفإذاأنتجوادٌ
قاصد⟨. ١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩النقض⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.
أصلم،ونسخةفيش: ⟩سننه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
399 1.174.5 Beware of marring your morals and shifting your
mores---speak with a single tongue. Let every man safeguard his tongue,
for the tongue can bolt and carry off its master. By God, I see no
godfearing person profiting from his piety until he safeguards his
tongue. A believer's tongue is found behind his heart and a hypocrite's
heart is found behind his tongue. When a believer intends to say
something, he first mulls in his heart the words he will say. Then, if
he finds them to be good, he voices them, and if he finds them to be
wicked, he buries them. A hypocrite, on the other hand, says whatever
comes to his tongue with- out knowing what is for and what against him.
God's Messenger has said, ⟨A person's belief is right only when his
heart is right, and his heart is right only when his tongue is
righteous.⟩1 Let those of you who can, meet the Almighty with hands
unsullied by Muslim blood or property, and tongue unblemished by
defiling their honor. 1.174.6 Servants of God! Know that a believer
considers licit this year what he had considered licit the year before.
He considers illicit this year what he had
consideredillicittheyearbefore.Theinnovationsof mendonotmaketheillicit
licit for you. What God has made licit is licit, and what God has made
illicit is illicit.You have experienced many affairs and bitten down on
them with strong teeth, you have been forewarned by the example of those
who lived before you, parables have been drawn for you, and you have
been called to the clear way. Only the truly deaf remain deaf to the
call, only the truly blind remain blind. Those whom God does not benefit
through their own trials and experiences will not benefit from homilies
and counsel. It is when their own sins confront them that they will
accept as good what they had thought to be bad, and as bad what they had
thought to be good. People are of two kinds: one follows a clear path,
while another introduces heresies with no proof of established practice
nor gleam of evidence from God. 1.174.7 The Almighty's best counsel is
found in this Qurʾan. It is God's strong rope, it is his firm cord, it
is the heart's springtime, it is the wellspring of wis- dom. Nothing
burnishes the heart like the Qurʾan. But all who were mindful have
disappeared, only those who have forgotten it, or pretend to have
forgot- ten, remain. People, when you know something to be good, lend it
support. When you know something to be evil, distance yourself. The
Messenger used to say, ⟨Son of Adam, do good and avoid evil, and you
will race ahead like a thoroughbred!⟩ 1 Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §6.41. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 400 Text and
Translation 1.174.8ملظلا اّمأف بلطي ال روفغم ملظو كرتي ال ملظو رفغُ ي ال
ملظف ةثالث ملظلا ّنإو الأ َ ي اَلَ هللا َ ّن ِإ﴿ هناحبس هللا لاق هللاب
كرشلاف رفغي ال يذلا ْ شُ ي نَأُ رِفْغ رَكَب ِ هِ﴾وأمّا الظلم دابعلا ملظف كرتي ال
يذلا ملظلا اّمأو تانَ هلا ضعب دنع هسفن دبعلا ملظف رفغي يذلا بعضهم بعضًا.
القصاص هناك شديد ليس هو جَرْحًا بالم ُ دى ولا ضربًا بالسِّياط ولـكنّه ما ي ُ
ريخ ّقحلا نم نوهركت اميفًةعامج ّنإف هللا نيد يف نُ ّولتلاو مكاّيإف .هعم كلذ
رغصتس الوىضمنّمماًريخةقرفب اًدحأطعيملهناحبسهللا ّنإو لطابلانمنوّبحتاميفةقرُ
فنم ممّن بقي.
1.174.9ياأيّهاالناسطوبىلمنشغلهعيبهعنعيوبالناسوطوبىلمنلزمبيتهوأكل قوته
وٱشتغل بطاعة ربّه١ وبكى على خطيئته فكان من نفسه في شغل والناس منه في
راحة. 1.175ومن كلام له عليه السلام في معنى الحكمين فأجمع رأيُ ملائكم على
أن ٱختاروا رجلين فأخذنا عليهما أن يُج َ عجِعا عند القرآن ولا يجاوزاه ويكون
ألسنتهما معه وقلوبهما تَبَعَه فتاها عنه وتركا الحقّ وهما يبصرانه وكان الجور
هَواهما والاعوجاج دأبُهما وقد سبق ٱستثناؤنا عليهما في الحكم بالعدل والعمل
بالحقّ سوءَرأيهما وجور حكمهما. والثقة في أيدينا لأنفسنا حين خالفا سبيل
الحقّ وأتيا .مكحلا سوكعم نم فرعُ ي ال امب ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ:
⟩بطاعته⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
401 1.174.8 Harken to me! Wrongs are of three kinds: a wrong that will
not be for- given, one that will not be left unrequited, and a third
that will be forgiven and not pursued. The wrong that will not be
forgiven is assigning partners to God, for the Almighty has said, «God
does not forgive being assigned partners.»1The wrong that will be
forgiven is the wrong a person incurs against himself when committing
small sins. The wrong that will not be left unrequited is the wrong
people commit against one another, and retribution in this instance will
be severe.Itwillnotconsistof beingstabbedwithaknifeorstruckwithawhip,but
these will seem slight in comparison. Beware of capricious change in
God's reli- gion. Uniting to face a challenge in the cause of right is
far better than dividing the community to attain wrong. The Almighty has
never granted anyone any- thing good through dissent, not among those
who are gone, nor among those who remain. 1.174.9 People! Blessed are
those whose faults distract them from the faults of others.2 Blessed are
those who remain in their homes, eat their food, occupy themselves with
acts of obedience for their Lord, weep for their sins, and weary
themselves by constant chiding, while never causing others unease. 1.175
From an address by ʿAlī regarding the arbitrators:3 Your majority
opinion settled on choosing two arbitrators. I made them pledge that
they would kneel before the Qurʾan and not transgress its command, that
their tongues would speak according to its guidance and their hearts
follow it. But they strayed from the Qurʾan and abandoned the truth,
despite seeing it before their eyes---discrimination was their desire
and crookedness their practice! I had declared at the outset that my
acceptance of their ruling would be contingent on their implementing
justice and truth, and that stipulation excluded any ruling at which
they might arrive at through corrupt views or unjust dictates. Since
they have strayed from the path of truth and produced a contrary ruling,
authority remains in my hands. 1 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:48, 116. 2 Attributed
to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §3.35. 3 ʿAlī addressed this oration
to the Kharijites after news of the arbitrators' ruling---against him
and in Muʿāwiyah's favor---arrived in Kufa in 37/658 (B 578; Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 5:85). The arbitra- tors were ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣon Muʿāwiyah's
side, and Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī on ʿAlī's. ʿAlī signals here his own
reservations about the choice of arbitrators, and the fact that it was
the Kufan army that had forced his hand. On details of the arbitrators'
injustice, see F 295. On verses attributed to ʿAmr, boasting of
deceiving Abū Mūsā, see Ḥ10:56--57. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 402 Text
and Translation 1.176ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.176.1لا يشغله شان ولا
يغيّره زمان ولا يحويه مكان ولا يصفه لسان ولا يعز ُ ب عنه
عددقطرالماءولانجومالسماءولاسَوافيالريحفيالهواءولادبيبالنملعلىالصفاولا
مَقِيل الذرّفي الليلة الظلماء يعلممساقط الأوراق وخفيّ طَرْف الأحداق. وأشهد أن
لا إل ٰ ه إلّا الله غير معدول به ولا مشكوك فيه ولا مكفورٍ دين ُ ه ولا
مجحود تكوينه شهادة هدبع اًدمحم ّنأ دهشأو .هنيزاوم تلقثو هنيقي صلخو هتَ لخِد
تفصو هتّين تقدص نَم صتخملاوهقئاقححرشلماتْعُ ملاوهقئالخنمىبتجملاهلوسرو ّ
بعقائلكراماتهوالمصطفى لـكرائم١ رسالاته والموض َ حةُبه أشراط بيبرِغ هب ُ
ّولجملاو ىدهلا ُ ُ العمى. 1.176.2أيّهاالناسإنّ الدنيات َ غُرّالمؤمّللهاوالمُخل
ِ دإليهاولاتَنْفَسبمننافسفيهاوتغلب منغلبعليها.وٱيماللهماكانقومقط ّ فيغَض ّ
نعمةمنعيشفزالعنهمإلّابذنوب سْيـَ لَ هللا َ ّنَأ﴿ـل اهوحرتجٱ َ ب ِ لوزتو مقنلا
مهب لزنت نيح سانلا ّنأ ولو .﴾ِديِبَعْلِّل ٍماَ ّلَظ َ رَ ل مهبولق نم ٍهَ لَوو
مهتاّين نم قدصب مهّبر ىلإ اوعزف معنلا مهنع دراش ّلك مهيلع َ ّد وأصلح لهم
كلّ فاسد وإن ّ ي لأخشى عليكم أن تكونوا في فترة وقد كانت أمور مضت مِلتُم
فيها مَيلة ً كنتم فيها عندي غير محمودين ولئن رُدّ عليكم أمر كم إنكّم لسعداء
وما عليّ إلّا الجهد ولو أشاء أن أقول لقلت عفا الله عمّا سلف. 1.177ومن كلام
له عليه السلام وقد سأله ذِعْل ِ ب اليمانيّفقال هل رأيت ربّك يا أمير المؤمنين
فقال عليه السلام أفأعبد ما لا أرى قال وكيف تراه قال
١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيش: ⟩لمكارم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
403 1.176 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.176.1 No matter can preoccupy him,
no time can alter him, no place can encompass him, and no tongue can
describe him. Nothing escapes his reach--- not the droplets in water,
nor the stars in the sky, not the dust-raising winds in the air, not the
crawling of ants on rocks, not the sleeping of insects in the dark
night. He knows the falling of leaves and the blinking of eyes. I bear
witness that there is no god but God. I do not equate him with another,
or doubt him, or reject his religion, or deny his creation. This
testimony comes from one whose intention is true, whose motives are
pure, whose certainty is limpid, and whose scales are heavy. I bear
witness that Muḥammad is God's servant and messen- ger, the one chosen
from among all his creation, the one selected to explain his truths, the
one singled out for his exquisite glories, the one designated to convey
his precious message, the one who clarifies signs of guidance, the one
through whom dark blindness is dispelled. 1.176.2 People! The world
deceives those who desire her and incline toward her. Cherishing not
those who compete for her, she conquers those who try to conquer her. By
God, no group who are given life's delightful bounties have them taken
away except due to their sins, for «God is not unjust to his ser-
vants.»2 When calamities swarm and bounties cease, if people turned to
their Lord with sincere intent and heartfelt longing, he would recover
their runaway camels and heal what was corrupted. I fear you are in a
state of ignorance. Events happened in the past during which you
deviated, and your behavior was less than admirable. If matters reverted
to what they were before, you would attain happiness, and I can try to
make that happen. If I so wished, I could also say: May God forgive the
past. 1.177 From an address by ʿAlī when Dhiʿlib, the Yemenite, asked
him, "Commander of the Faithful, have you seen your Lord?" ʿAlī replied,
"Would I worship what I do not see?" Dhiʿlib asked, "How do you see him,
then?" ʿAlī answered:3 1 After ʿUthmān's assassination, at the beginning
of ʿAlī's caliphate, in 35/656, in Medina. B 579; Ḥ10:62; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:157. 2 Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:51. 3 Early in ʿAlī's caliphate
in Medina, 36/656: ʿAlī ascended the pulpit of the Prophet's mosque
wearing the Prophet's mantle and sword, and said to the people, "Ask me
before you lose me" (§1.187). Dhiʿlib, a renowned and audacious orator,
stepped forward with this question, hop- ing to dumbfound him. ʿAlī
answered with these lines, and Dhiʿlib, repentant, fell in a swoon.
Ṣadūq, Amālī, 423, §55. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 404 Text and
Translation لا تدر كه١ العيون بمشاهدة العِيان ولـكن تدر كه القلوب بحقائق
الإيمان قريب من الأشياء غيرُملامِس بعيد منها غير مباي ِ ن متكلّم بلا رويّة
مريد بلا همّة صانع لا بجارحة لطيف لا يوصف بالخفا كبير لا يوصف بالجفا بصير
لا يوصف بالحاسّة رحيم لا .هتفاخم نم بولقلا ٢لجوَ تو هتمظعل هوجولا ونعت
ةّقرلاب فصوي 1.178ومن كلام له عليه السلام في ذمّ أصحابه
أحمداللهعلىماقضىمنأمروقدّرمنفعلوعلىٱبتلائيبكمأيّتهاالفرقةالتيإذاأمرت
لمتطعوإذادعوتلمتجبإنأهملتم٣خُضتموإنحوربتمخُرتموإنٱجتمعالناسعلى إمام طعنتم
وإن أجبتم إلى مُشاقّة ن َ كصتم. لا أَبَا لغير كم ما تنتظرون بنصر كم والجهاد
على حقّكمالموتأوالذلّ لـكمفواللهلئنجاءيوميوليأتينّنيليفرّقنّ
بينيوبينكموأنالصحبتكم قالٍ وبكم غير كثير. لله أنتم أما دينٌ يجمعكم ولا
مَحميّة ت َ شحَذ ةيواعم ّنأ اً بيجع سيلوأ مك يدعو الجفاة الطغام فيتّبعونه على
غير معونة ولا عطاء وأنا أدعو مالسإلا ةكيرَ ت متنأو مك وبقيّة الناس إلى
المعونة أو طائفةٍمن العطاء فت َ فرّقون عنّي وتختلفون عليّ. إنّه لا يخرج إليكم
من أمري رضى فترضونه ولا سخط فتجتمعون عليه. وإنّ أحب ّ ما أنا لاقٍ إليّ
الموتقددارست ُ كمالكتابوفاتحتكمالحِجاجوعرّفتكمماأنكرتموسوّغتكممامَج َ
جْتملوكان الأعمى يلحظ أو النائم يستيقظ. وأَقْرِب ْ بقوم من الجهل بالله
قائدُهم معاوية ومؤدّبهم ٱبن النابغة. ١ن، م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش: كذا. ھ، وأصل
ش، ونسخة في ن، ي: ⟩لا تراه⟨. ٢م، ي، ونسخة في ش: كذا. ش، ن، ھ: ⟩تجب⟨. ٣م،
ي، ونسخة في ھ: كذا. ش، ن، وأصل ھ: ⟩أمهلتم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 405
Eyesdonotseehimthroughphysicalobservation,butheartsperceivehimwith true
belief. He is near to all things without touching them, yet far from
them without being apart. He speaks without the need to reflect, wills
without the need to aspire, and crafts without the need for hands. He is
sublime but can- not be described as concealed. He is mighty but cannot
be described as harsh. He is all-seeing but cannot be described as
having eyes. He is merciful but can- not be described as having
compassion. All faces bow to his majesty. All hearts tremble in awe.
1.178 From an address by ʿAlī censuring his associates:1 I offer praise
to God for the affairs he has ordained and the events he has des- tined,
and even for afflicting me with you, the faction who don't obey when I
command, or answer when I call! In times of peace, you speak boldly, but
when attacked, you bleat like lambs.2 When people unite behind a leader,
you chal- lenge him, and if you answer a call to fight, you soon
retreat. May you not be deprived of fathers!What are you waiting for?Why
do you sit back, why do you not fight for your rights?This way, you will
only find death or dishonor! By God, when my day comes---and it is
coming---and when it takes me from you, I will leave you as one who
detests your company, and who, when he has you on his side, has nothing.
My God, what manner of men are you! Does no religion unite you, no
zealous honor sharpen your resolve? Is it not astonishing that when
Muʿāwiyah calls to his uncouth riffraff they follow him, even without
wages or stipend, and when I call out to you---you, who are the legacy
of Islam and sons of the first Muslims,3 and even though I promise you
wages and stipend---you dissent, you oppose my command! Everything I
propose, you reject, and every- thing I reject, you band together to
promote. O how I long to meet death! I instructed you in the Book and
showed you its proofs, I dispelled your igno- rance and taught you to
swallow the dribble from your flaccid mouths---but the blind can't see,
and the sleeping don't wake! O how close to unbelief is that faction
whose caravan is led by Muʿāwiyah, and whose instructor in morals is the
Harlot's son!4 1 ʿAlī delivered this oration in Kufa in 38/658, urging
his followers to march in support of Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, his governor
in Egypt, who had been besieged by Muʿāwiyah's com- mander ʿAmr ibn
al-ʿĀṣ. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:107. Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 1:291. 2 Ar. khurtum.
Or, "you show weakness." 3 "Legacy of Islam," lit. "broken ostrich
shells (tarīkah) of Islam." "Sons of the first Muslims," lit. "remainder
of the people." 4 Referring to ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, whose mother was
infamous in the pre-Islamic period as "The Harlot" (nābighah, lit. "the
woman who shows herself"). Details in note at §1.81. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 406 Text
and Translation 1.179ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد أرسل رجل ً ا من أصحابه
ي َ عْلَم له عِلم َقوم من جند الـكوفة همّوا باللحاق بالخوارج وكانوا على خوف
منه عليه السلام فلمّا عاد إليه الرجل قال له .اونعَظف اونُ بَج مأ اونطَقف
اونِمَأَأ فقال الرجل بل ظعنوا يا أمير المؤمنين فقال عليه السلام َ ب اَ مَك﴿
مهـ﴾ـل اًدْعُ ب﴿ عِدَت ىلع فويسلا تّبُصو مهيلإ ةّنِسألا تعرشُأ ول امأ﴾ُدوُ مَ ث ْ
هاماتهملقدندمواعلىماكانمنهمإنّ الشيطاناليومقدٱستقلّهموهوغدًامتبرّئمنهم ومخلٍّ
عنهم.فحسبهمبخروجهممنالهدىوٱرتكاسهمفيالضلالوالعمىوصدّهمعن الحقّ وجِماحهم في
التيه. 1.180نينمؤملاريمأةبطخلاهذهبانبطخلاقّيلاكِبلافوَ
ننعيور.مالسلاهيلعهلةبطخنمو عليّ عليه السلام بالـكوفة وهو قائم على حجارة
نصبها له جَعدة بن هُبيرة المخزوميّ وعليه مِدْرَعة من صوف وحمائل سيفه ليف ٌ وفي
رجليه نعلان من ليف وكأنّ جبينه ث َ فِنة ب َ عير فقال 1.180.1الحمد الله
الذي إليه مصائر الخلق وعواقب الأمر نحمده على عظيم إحسانه ونيّر برهانه
ونوامي فضله وٱمتنانه حمدًا يكون لحقّه قضاء ولشكره أداء وإلى ثوابه مقرّبًا
جار ةناعتسٱ هب نيعتسنو .اً بجوم هديزم نسحلو ٍ لفضله مؤمّل لنفعه واثق بدفعه
معترف اً نمؤم هيلإ بانأو اً نقوم هاجر نم ناميإ هب نمؤنو .لوقلاو لمعلاب هل
نعذم لو َ ّطلاب هل .اًدهتجم اً بغار هبَذالو اًدّجمم همّظعو اًدّحوم هل صلخأو اً
نعذم هل عنخو al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
407 1.179 From an address by ʿAlī. ʿAlī had sent one of his men to bring
news of a group from his Kufan army who were tempted to join the
Kharijites and were fearful of ʿAlī's retribution. When the man came
back, ʿAlī asked him: Did they feel secure enough to stay, or did they
become cowards and run? The man answered: They're gone, Commander of the
Faithful. ʿAlī then said:1 «Away with» them, «as theThamūd were done
away with!»2 If spears had been
hurledatthemandswordshadrainedontheirheads,theywouldhaveregretted what
they have done! Satan has found them small pickings today, and tomor-
row he will discard them and disown them completely. Enough that they
have left the home of guidance and lapsed into error and blindness.
Enough that they have challenged right and bolted into the waterless
wastes. 1.180 From an oration by ʿAlī. Nawf al-Bikālī reported: The
Commander of the Faith- ful addressed us in Kufa, standing on a rock
placed for him by Jaʿdah ibn Hubayrah al-Makhzūmī. He was wearing a
simple wool garment, his sword-belt was plaited from palm fronds, he
wore palm-frond sandals on his feet, and his forehead looked like the
calloused knee of a camel stallion. He orated:3 1.180.1
PraiseGod,towhomallcreationarrives,andallaffairsreturn!Wepraise him for
his great blessings, his lucent proof, and his abundant favor and
bounty. We praise him to repay his due, render him thanks, draw closer
to his reward, and deserve more of his beautiful favors. We ask his aid,
hoping for his favor, wishing for his profit, trusting in his
protection, acknowledging his gift, and submitting to him with deed and
word. We believe in him, placing our hopes in him with certainty,
turning to him as believers, bowing to him in submis- sion, proclaiming
his unity with sincerity, glorifying his greatness, and seeking his
protection through our hopes and efforts. 1 The group ʿAlī refers to in
this text are the Banū Nājiyah, a Christian tribe, who, under their
leader al-Khirrīt ibn Rāshid al-Nājī, deserted from ʿAlī's army after
the arbitration, in the early monthsof
38/658.ʿAlīsenthiscommanderMaʿqilibnQaysal-Riyāḥīwithtroopstofightthem,
and Khirrīt and many of his warriors were killed in the ensuing battle.
Details in Ḥ3:120--151 (text at 130). The rest were made captive, and
Maṣqalah ibn Hubayrah---ʿAlī's governor in Ardashīr---purchased them
from Maʿqil and freed them. Maṣqalah, after paying only a frac- tion of
the price, defected to Muʿāwiyah (see §1.44 and the accompanying note).
2
Qurʾan,Hūd11:95.ThamūdwerethetribewhochallengedtheArabianProphetṢāliḥandwere
destroyed. 3 Said to be the last oration that ʿAlī delivered standing,
before he was struck the death blow, in Kufa, in 40/661. Ḥ10:112.
Possibly a Friday sermon, based on Nawf's mention of "the next Friday"
in §1.180.7. "His forehead looked like the calloused knee of a camel
stallion" from long prostrations in prayer. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 408 Text
and Translation 1.180.2لم يولد سبحانه فيكونَ في العزّمشارَ كًا ولم يلد فيكون
موروثًا هالكًا ولم يتقدّمه وقت ولا زمان ولم يَتَعاوَرْه زيادة ولا نقصان بل ظهر
للعقول بما أرانا من علامات دمع الب تاد َ ّطوم تاوامسلا قلخ هقلخ دهاوش
نمف .مربملا ءاضقلاو نقتملا ريبدتلا قائمات بلا سند دعاهنّ فأجبن طائعات
مذعنات غير متلكّئات ولا مبطئات ولولا هتكئالمل اً نكسم الو هشرعل اًعضوم
ّنهلعج امل ةيِعاو َ ّطلاب ّنهناعذإو ةّيبوبرلاب هل نهرارقإ ولا مَصعَدًا للكَلِم
الطيّب والعمل الصالح من خلقه. جعل نجومها أعلامًا ي َ ستدلّ بها الحـيران في
مختل َ ُ جُس مامْهِ لدٱ اهرون ءوض عنمي مل راطقألا جاجِف ف ف الليل المظلم ولا
.رمقلا رون ؤلألت نم تاوامسلا يف عاش ام ّدرت نأ سِدانَ حلا داوس بيبالَج
تعاطتسٱ فسبحانمنلايخفىعليهسوادغسقداج ٍ ولاليلساج ٍ فيب ِ
قاعالأرضينالمتطأطئات ولا في ي َ هنع تشالت امو ءامسلا قفأ يف دعرلا هب
لجلجتي امو تارواجتملا عْف ُ ّسلا عاف
بروقالغماموماتسقطمنورقةتزيلهاعنمسقطهاعواصفالأنواءوٱنهطالالسماء. ويعلم
مسقط القطرة ومقرّها ومَسحَب الذرّة ومَج َ رّها وما يكفي الب َ عوضة من قوتها
وما تحمل من أنثى في بطنها. 1.180.3والحمد لله الكائن قبل أن يكون كرسيٌّأو
عرش أو سماء أو أرض أو جانّ أو إنس. لا يدرك بوهم ولا يقدّر بفهم ولا يشغله
سائل ولا ينقصه نائل ولا يبصر١ بعين ولا يُح َ دّ بِأين ولا يوصف بالأزواج ولا
يَخلق بعِلاج ولا يدرك بالحواس ّ ولا يقاس
بالناس.الذيكلّمموسىتكليمًاوأراهمنآياتهعظيمًابلاجوارحولاأدواتولانطق َ هَ ل
الو فِصف كّبر فصول فّلكتملا اهّيأ اً قداص تنك نإ لب تاو ْ جبريل أو ميكائيل ُ
حَي نأ مهلوقع ةهِّلوتُم نيّنِحَجرُم سدقلا تارُجُح يف نيبّرقملا ةكئالملا دونجو دّوا
أحسن ١ش،ن،ي:كذا.م: ⟩ينظر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
409 1.180.2 Never begotten, he has no partner in might, never begetting,
he has no heir, for he will never die.1 Time and age have not preceded
him, increase and decrease have not affected him. Rather, he appeared
before our intel- lects through the signs he showed us of his perfect
planning and his irre- vocable decree. Among the testaments of his
creation is the creation of the skies, anchored without columns and
standing without supports. He called out to them, and they answered,
obedient and submissive, neither hesitant nor slow. If not for their
acknowledgment of his sovereignty and their sub- mission to him in
obedience, he would not have made them the home for his throne, the
habitation of his angels, or the place to which the pure word and the
pious deed ascends from his creation.2 He made its stars waymarks
through which those lost in the myriad valleys of the earth's provinces
are guided. The darkening of the dusky night does not veil their glow,
and the swathes of intense black do not block the gleam of the moon from
spreading in the skies. Glory to the one from whom nothing is hidden!
Not the black- ness of spreading obscurity or tranquil night in the
earth's low regions and its rust-colored mountain ranges, not the crash
of thunder in the sky's far hori- zons and the momentary brilliance of
lightning bolts in the clouds, not the falling of a leaf that is then
blown away by stormy winds and pouring skies! He knows where each
raindrop falls and pools, where each ant trails and drags its food, what
foodstuffs suffice the gnat, and what every female carries in her belly.
1.180.3 Praise God, who existed before stool, or throne, or sky, or
earth, or jinn, or human. He cannot be grasped by the imagination or
measured by percep- tion. No suppliant distracts him from responding, no
gift diminishes his trea- sures. No eye can see him, no "where" can
limit him, he cannot be described as being one of a pair, he need not
toil to create, he cannot be grasped with the senses, he cannot be
compared to people. He spoke to Moses and showed him his majestic signs
without limbs, or implements, or speech, or mouth.3 If you are
sincere---O you who take on the burden of describing your Lord!---then
first describe the archangels Gabriel and Michael, or the legions of
cherubim in the vaults of the holy heavens, who bend low in humility,
whose intellects bewilderment hinders from constraining the best of
creators! Only entities with forms and appendages, entities that run
their course and perish when 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Ikhlāṣ112:3. 2
Modified quote of Qurʾan, Fāṭir 35:10. 3 Ar. lahawāt, lit. "uvulas,"
translated as "mouths." God's speaking to Moses is a modified quote from
Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:164. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 410 Text and
Translation الخالقين وإنّما يدرك بالصفات ذوو الهيئة والأدوات ومن ينقضي
إذا بلغ أمدَ حدّه بالفناء. فلا إل ٰ ه إلّا هو أضاء بنورهكلّ ظلام وأظلم
بظلمتهكلّ نور. 1.180.4أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى الله الذي ألبسكم الرياش
وأسبغ عليكم المعاش. ولو ً ليبس توملا عفدل وأ اً مَ ّ لُس ءاقبلا ىلإ دجي
اًدحأ ّنأ ا لكان ذلك سليمان بن داود عليهما السلام الذي سُخِّر له ملك الجنّ
والإنس مع النبوّة وعظيم الزلفة فلمّا ٱستوفى طُعْمَته وٱستكمل مدّته رمته قِسيّ
الفناء بنِبال الموت وأصبحت الديار منه خالية والمساكن معطّلة ورثها قوم
آخرون وإنّ لـكم في القرون السالفة لعبرة. أين العَمال ِ قة وأبناء العمالقة
سَ ّرلا نئادم باحصأ نيأ ةنعارفلا ءانبأو ةنعارفلا نيأ ّ الذين قتلوا
النبيّين وأطفأوا سنن اوركسعو فولألا اومزهو شويجلاب اوراس نيذلا نيأو
نيراّبجلا ١رَ يِس اويحأو نيلسرملا .نئادملا اون َ ّدَمو ركاسعلا 1.180.5ومنها
قد لبس للحكمة جُنّتها وأخذها بجميع أدبها من الإقبال عليها والمعرفة بها
والتفرّغ لها فهي ُ تّ لاض هسفن دنع ه التي يطلبها وحاجته التي يسأل عنها فهو
مغترب إذا ٱغترب الإسلام وضرب ب ِ عَسيب ذَنَبه وأَلْصَقَ الأرض ب ِ جِرانه بقيّة من
بقايا حجّته خليفة من خلائف أنبيائه. 1.180.6ثمّقال عليه السلام أيّها الناس
إن ّ ي قد بثثت لـكم المواعظ التي وعظ بها الأنبياء أممهم وأدّيت إليكم ما
أدّت الأوصياءإلىمنبعدهموأدّبتكمبسوطيفلمتستقيمواوحَدَوتكمبالزواجرفلمتستوسقوا.
للهأنتمأتتوقّعونإمامًاغيريي َ طأبكمالطريقويرشد
كمالسبيل.ألاإنّهقدأدبرمنالدنياما كان مقبل ً ً ليلق اوعابو رايخألا
هللاُدابع َلاحْرَ ّتلا َعَمْزَأو اًربدم ناك ام اهنم لبقأو ا ا من الدنيا لا يبقى
بكثير من الآخرة لا يفنى. ما ضرّإخواننا الذين سفكت دماؤهم بصفّين
١ش،ن،ي:كذا.م،ونسخةفيش: ⟩سنن⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
411 they have reached their limit, can be grasped through a description
of their attributes. Understand that there is no God but he. Every
darkness brightens with his light, every light darkens with his
darkness. 1.180.4 Servants of God, I counsel you to be conscious of God,
who clothed you in finery and gave you a life of plenty. If ever there
was one who could have found a ladder to eternity or a path to repel
death, it would have been Solomon, son of David, who was given dominion
over the kingdom of jinn and humans, along with prophecy and intimacy
with God. But when he had his received his fill of the world and
completed his time, annihilation felled him with the arrow of death.
Abodes became empty of him and habitations vacant. They were inherited
by others. Truly, you have been given lessons in the passage of
generations!WherearetheAmalekitesandthedescendantsof theAmalekites?
Where are the Pharaohs and the descendants of the Pharaohs? Where are
the people of the cities of Rass, who killed their prophets,
extinguished the prac- tice of God's emissaries, and revived the ways of
tyrants?1Where are those who marched at the head of armies, defeating
thousands, mobilizing troops, and building great cities? 1.180.5 From
the same oration: He will come bearing the shield of wisdom, having
seized it with all its re- quirements---attention, recognition, and
devotion. For him, wisdom is his own lost camel that he seeks, his own
missing saddlebags about which he inquires. Whenever Islam is exiled,
tail down like a camel and neck flat on the earth, he too hides in
exile. He is God's remaining proof, the successor of his prophets.
1.180.6 Then he said: People! I have given you the counsel with which
prophets guided their nations and conveyed to you what their legatees
conveyed to the subsequent gener- ation. I have disciplined you with my
whip, but you have not stayed upright. I have steered you with
admonitions, but your flock has not kept together. O God, what manner of
men are you? Are you waiting for another leader to walk you on the path
and guide you to the way? Listen to me! That portion of the world which
had approached has turned back, and that which had turned back now
approaches. God's pious servants have resolved to depart on their
journey. They have sold the paltry ephemera of the world for the
permanent abundance of the hereafter. Our brothers whose blood was spilt
in Ṣiffīn have lost noth- 1 The people of Rass are mentioned in Qurʾan,
Furqān 25:38, Qāf 50:12. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 412 Text and
Translation ألّا يكونوا اليوم أحياء ي ُ َ نَ ّرلا نوبرشيو صَصَغلا نوغيس ق قد
والله لقوا الله فوفّاهم أجورهم وأحلّهم دار الأمن بعد خوفهم. أين إخواني
الذين ركبوا الطريق ومضوا على نيذلا مهناوخإ نم مهؤارظن نيأو نيتداهشلا وذ
نيأو ناهِّيَ ّتلا نبٱ نيأو راّمع نيأ ّقحلا تعاقدوا على المنيّة وأُبرِدَبرؤوسهم
إلى الفجرة. ثمّضرب عليه السلام بيده إلى لحيته فأطال البكاء ثمّقال
أَوْهِعلىإخوانيالذينتلواالقرآنفأحكموهوتدبّرواالفرضفأقاموهأحيواالسنّةوأماتوا
البدعة دُعوا للجهاد فأجابوا ووثقوا بالقائد فٱتّبعوا. 1.180.7ثمّنادى بأعلى
صوته الجهادَالجهادَعباد الله. ألا وإن ّ ي معسكر في يومي هذا فمن أراد
الرواح إلى الله فليخرج. قال نوف وعقد للحسين عليه السلام في عشرة آلاف
ولقيس بن سعد في عشرة آلاف ولأبي أيّوب الأنصاري ّ في عشرة آلاف ولغيرهم على
أعداد أُخَر وهو يريد الرجعة إلى صفّين. فما تدقف مانغألاك اّ نكف ركاسعلا
تعجارتف هللا هنعل مجلم نبٱ نوعلملا هبرض ىّتح ةعمجلا تراد راعيها تختطفها
الذئاب من كلّ مكان. 1.181ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.181.1الحمد الله
المعروف من غير رؤية والخالق من غير مَنْصَب َ ة خلق الخلائق بقدرته وٱستعبد
الأرباب بعزّته وسادَ العظماء بجوده. وهو الذي أسكن الدنيا خلقه وبعث إلىالجنّ
والإنسرسلهليكشفوالهمعنغطائهاوليحذّروهممنضرّائهاوليضربوالهم
أمثالهاوليبصّروهمعيوبهاوليهجمواعليهمبمعتبرمنتصرّفمَصاحِّهاوأسقامهاوحلالها
وحرامهاوماأعدّ سبحانهللمطيعينمنهموالعصاةمنجنّةونارو كرامةوهَوان.أحمدهإلى
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
413 ing by not being alive today. They no longer choke on morsels of
food or drink muddy water. By God, they have returned to him, and he has
given them their full reward, housing them in a place of safety after
their earlier trepidations! O where are my brothers who rode on the high
road and trod the track of right? Where is ʿAmmār, where is Ibn
al-Tayyihān, where is Dhū al-Shahādatayn?1 Where are their peers, their
brothers, who pledged to fight to the death, and whose decapitated heads
the dispatch carried to the depraved? Upon saying these words, ʿAlī
placed his hand on his beard and wept long and hard, then he continued:
Alas for my brothers who recited the Qurʾan and recited it well, who
reflected on their duty and undertook it!They revived the Sunnah and
killed heresy, they
werecalledtojihadandansweredthecall,theytrustedintheircommanderand
followed him. 1.180.7 Then ʿAlī called out in a raised voice: Servants
of God! Jihad, jihad! Harken to me! I will set up camp today! All who
wish to return to God should muster! Raḍī: Nawf said: In planning the
return to Ṣiffīn, ʿAlī appointed Ḥusayn commander over ten thousand
troops, Qays ibn Saʿd commander over ten thousand, Abū Ayyūb
al-Anṣārīcommanderovertenthousand,anddifferentcommandersovervaryingnum-
bers of troops. But no sooner had the next Friday come around than the
cursed Ibn Muljam struck him his deathblow, and the troops pulled back.
We were like sheep who had lost their shepherd, snatched by wolves from
every side. 1.181 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1.181.1 Praise be to God,
recognized without being seen, and creator without toil. He created all
things with his power, subjugated kings with his might, and dominated
grandees with his generosity. It was he who lodged his creatures in the
world, and he sent messengers to jinn and humans to lift her veils, warn
of her harm, explain her ciphers, and highlight her faults, to offer
lessons in her cycles of illness and health and her bounds of licit and
illicit, and to show them what God has prepared for those who obey or
disobey---paradise versus hell- 1 The three are the Prophet's venerable
Companions, ʿAmmār ibn Yāsir, Ibn al-Tayyihān al- Anṣārī, and Khuzaymah
ibn al-Thābit, Dhū al-Shahādatayn, "The-Twice-Martyred," who were killed
fighting for ʿAlī at the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 414 Text
and Translation نفسهكماٱستحمدإلىخلقه ﴿جَعَلَالله ُل ِ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دْرًا﴾ولكلّ
قدرأجل ً او﴿ل ِ كُلِّ أَجَلٍ .اً ـ﴾ـباَ تِك 1.181.2منها في ذ كر القرآن فالقرآن
آمر زاجر وصامت ناطق حجّة الله على خلقه أخذ عليه ميثاقهم١ وٱرتهن عليه
أنفسهم أتمّنوره وأكرم به دينه وقبض نبيّه صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله وقد فرغ إلى
الخلق من أحكامالهدىبه.فعظّموامنهسبحانهماعظّممننفسهفإنّهلميُخْف هنيدنماً
ئيشمكنع ِ هيلإ وعدت وأ هنع رجزت ةمكحم ةيآو اًيداب اً مَ لَ ع هل لعجو اّلإ
ههرك وأ هيضر اً ئيش كرتي ملو فرضاه فيما بقي واحد وسخطه فيما بقي واحد.
وٱعلموا أنّه لن يرضى عنكم بشيء سخطه على من كان قبلـكم ولن يسخط عليكم بشيء
رضيه ممّن كان قبلـكم وإنّما تسيرون في أثر بي ّ ىلع مكّثحو مكايند ةنوؤم
مكافك دق .مكـلبق نم لاجرلا هلاق دق لوق ِعْجَرِ ب نومّلكتتو ن الشكر وٱفترض من
ألسنتكم الذ كر. 1.181.3وأوصاكم بالتقوى وجعلها منتهى رضاه وحاجته من خلقه
فٱتّقوا الله الذي ّلكو دق هبتك متنلعأ نإو هملع متررسأ نإ هتضبق يف مكبّلقتو
هديب مكيصاوَ نو هنيعب متنأ ً لطاب نوتبثي الو ا ً ّقح نوطقسي ال اًماركةظفح
كلذب ا وٱعلموا أنّه ﴿مَن ْلَعْجَيَ هللا ِقَ ّتـَ ي ْ َ رْخَمُ هَ ل ّ لخيو مَل ُ ّظلا
نم اًرونو نتفلا نم﴾اًج ده فيما ٱشتهت نفسه وينزله منزل الـكرامة اهؤاقفرو
هتكئالم اهراّوزو هتجهب اهرونو هُشرع اهُ ّلظ هسفنل اهعنطصٱ راد يف هدنع
رسله.فبادرواالمعادوسابقواالآجالفإنّ الناسيوشِكأنينقطعبهمالأملويرهقهم
الأجلويسدّ عنهمبابالتوبةفقدأصبحتمفيمثلماسألإليهالرجعةمنكانقبلـكم
١م،ھ:كذا.ش،ن،ي: ⟩عليهمميثاقه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
415 fire, honor versus shame. I offer him praise in the full measure he
deserves from his creatures. «God has appointed for each thing a
measure,» for each measure a timespan, and «for each timespan a
prescribed end.»1 1.181.2 From the same oration about the Qurʾan: The
Qurʾan commands and forbids, it is silent and yet it speaks, it is God's
proof against his creatures. He required them to offer the Qurʾan their
oaths and pledge their souls. He perfected its light, honored his
religion through it, and recalled his Prophet only after he had fully
conveyed the guidance of its rulings. Glorify God, then, in all the
glories that he has shown you, for he has not concealed from you any
part of his religion. He has left nothing that he likes or dislikes
without setting up a shining banner and a clear sign that either forbids
a thing or calls toward it. His likes for future generations are the
same, and his dislikes for them are also identical, so you should know
that he will not be pleased with something you do that displeased him
from the generations before you, while he will also not be displeased
with you for doing something
thatpleasedhimfromthem.Youfollowclearfootsteps,andyourspeechechoes the
words of men who walked before. In all this, God has provided you with
enough provisions for your life in this world---he has urged you to give
thanks and claimed tribute from your tongues. 1.181.3 God has counseled
you to piety and made it the ultimate way to earn his pleasure and
fulfil what he requires of his creatures. Be conscious of God, then, for
you are always before his eyes, your forelocks are in his hand, and your
fortunes are in his grip. If you hide something, he knows it, and if you
disclose something, he writes it down. He has appointed noble guardians
over you who
nevermisssomethingortranscribesomethinginerror.2Knowthat«Godshows the
God-conscious a way out»3 from seditions, and he grants them light after
darkness and eternal life with everything their hearts desire.4 He
houses the pious with honor near him, in the home he has prepared for
himself which is shaded by his throne, whose light is from his splendor,
whose visitors are his angels, and whose companions are his messengers.
Hasten to return to God, and race against your lifespans! The time is
near when your hopes will be cut off, death will overtake you, and the
door of repentance will be shut in your face. This morning, you are
still in the place to which your deceased ancestors 1 Qurʾan, Ṭalāq
65:3, Raʿd 13:38. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Infiṭār 82:10--11. 3 Qurʾan,
Ṭalāq 65:2. 4 Reference to Qurʾan, Anbiyāʾ 21:102. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 416 Text
and Translation وأنتم بنو سبيل على سفر من دار ليست بدار كم قد أوذنتم
منها بالارتحال وأمرتم فيها بالزاد.وٱعلمواأنّهليسلهذاالجِل ْ
دالرقيقصبرعلىالنارفٱرحموانفوسكمفإنّكمقدجرّبتموها في مصائب الدنيا فرأيتم
جزع أحد كم من الشو كة تصيبه والعثرة ت ُ هقرحت ءاضْمَ ّرلاو هيمْد
فكيفإذاكانبينطابقينمننارضجيعحجروقرينشيطان أعلمتمأنّ مالكًاإذاغضب .هترجز نم
اًعزج اهباوبأ نيب تبّ ثوت اهرجز اذإو هبضغل اًضعب اهضعب مطح رانلا ىلع أيّها
الي َ َ هَ ل دق يذلا ريبكـلا نَف ز َ ه القَتِير كيف أنت إذا ٱلتحمت أطواق
النار بعظام الأعناقون َ شِبتالجوامعحتّىأكلتلحومالسواعد.فالله َالله
َمعشرالعبادوأنتمسالمون فيالصحّةقبلالسقموفيالفسحةقبلالضيقفٱسعوافيف َ
كاكرقابكممنقبلأنتغلق رهائنها أَسْهِروا عيونكم وأضمروا بطونكم وٱستعملوا
أقدامكم وأنفقوا أموالـكم وخذوا من أجساد َ هللااوُرُصنَت ْن ِإ﴿
هناحبسهللالاقدقف.اهنعاهباولخبتالومكسفنأىلعاهباودوجتمك تِّبَ ثُ يَو ْمُكْرُصنَي ْ
أَقْدَامَكُمْ﴾وقال ﴿مَن ذَا الذي ي ُ قْرِض ُ يَ ف اً نَسَح اًضْرَ قَ هللا ُ ُ هَ لُهَفِعاَض ٌ
ميِرَك ٌرْجَأُ هَ لَو ﴾. فلم يستنصر كم من ذلّ ولم يستقرضكم من ق ُ لّ ٱستنصر ُدوُ
نُج﴿ هلو مك تاَواَم َ ّسلا ِ وَالْأَرْضِ﴾﴿وَهُوَالْعَزِيزُ الْح َ كِيم﴾وٱستقرضكم وله
﴿خَزَائ ِ تاَواَم َ ّسلا ُن ِ ً لَ مَع ُنَسْحَأ ْمُكُ ّيَأ ْمُكَوُ لْبَي﴿ نأ دارأ امّنإو
.﴾ُدْيِ مَ حْلا ُ ّيِنَغْلاَوُه﴿و﴾ِضْرَأْلاَو ا﴾. فبادروا بأعمالـكم تكونوا مع جيران
الله في داره رَاف َ قَ بهم رسله وأَزَارَهم ملائكته وأكرم َ نواًبوغُ
لىقلتنأمهداسجأناصواًدبأرانسيسَحعمستنأمهعامسأ ِ لَٰذ﴿اً بَص كَ ف َ ض ْ لُ َ ي
نَمِهيِ تْؤُ يِهللا شَاءُوالله ُذُو الْفَض ْ لِ الْعَظِيم﴾. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 417 pleaded to be allowed to return.1 You are travelers soon
to leave this abode, which is not your home---you have heard the
announcement to depart and the command to gather your provisions. Know
that your delicate skin cannot bear the torture of the Fire and take
pity on your souls, for you have seen how they crumbled when faced with
the hurts of this world. You know how each of you dreads the prick of a
thorn, a fall that draws blood, the heat of burning sands. How, then,
will you endure being crushed between two sheets of fire with a stone
for bedmate and a devil for companion!2 Don't you know that when the
angel Mālik vents his anger upon the Fire, one part devours another in
terror, and when he shouts at it, its flames shoot in panic from locked
door to locked door!3 O decrepit, timeworn man whose hair is flecked
with white! What will you do when shackles of fire choke you and fuse
with the bones of your neck, when fetters eat into the flesh of your
arms? O assembly of God's servants, fear God, fear God, while you are
still sound, while you have health before illness strikes, while you
have room before your straits constrict! Strive to free your necks
before their release from bondage is forfeit! Keep the night-vigil,
starve your bellies, make use of your feet, spend your wealth, put your
bodies to work, and exert them for the benefit of your souls. Do not be
stingy in this, for God has promised, «If you help God, he will help you
and give you a firm foothold.»4 God has also invited you, «Who will
offer God a beautiful loan of deeds, that he may multiply it for him,
and give him a generous recompense?»5 God does not ask you for help out
of weakness, nor for a loan because he is poor. He asks you for help
while possessing «the legions of the skies and the earth», «and he is
mighty and wise».6 He asks you for a loan while possessing «the
treasures of the skies and the earth», and «he is rich and praised».7 In
truth, he wishes to «put you to the test, to see who among you performs
the best of deeds».8 Has- ten to perform good deeds, then, and you shall
be among God's neighbors in his abode, with his messengers for
companions, his angels for visitors, yourears protected from the Fire's
frightening roar, and your bodies safe from fatigue or weakness.9 «That
is God's bounty, which he bestows on whom he wills---great is God's
bounty!»10 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:99--100. 2 Reference to
Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:24, Qāf 50:23. 3 Mālik is the angel in charge of hell.
4 Qurʾan, Muḥammad 47:7. 5 Qurʾan, Ḥadīd 57:11. I have added the words
"of deeds" for clarity. 6 Qurʾan, Fatḥ48:7, Ibrāhīm 14:4. 7 Qurʾan,
Munāfiqūn 63:7, Ḥajj 22:64. 8 Qurʾan, Hūd 11:7. 9 Reference to Qurʾan,
Nisāʾ 4:69, Fāṭir 35:35. 10 Qurʾan, Jumʿah 62:4; Ḥadīd 57:21. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 418 Text and
Translation أقول ما تسمعون والله المستعان على نفسي وأنفسكم وهو حسبنا
ونعم الوكيل. 1.182مكح ال⟩ هعمسي ثيحب لاق دقو ّيئاطلا رِهْسُم نب جْرُ بلل هلاق
مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو إلّا لله⟨وكان من الخوارج أُسْكُت ْ قبّحك الله يا أَثْرَم
فوالله لقد ظهر الحقّ فكنت َ فيه ضئيل ً ُ توص اً ّيفخ كُصخش ا ك حتّى إذا ن َ
عَر َالباطل نجمت نجوم قرن الماعز. 1.183ومن خطبة له عليه السلام١
1.183.1الحمداللهالذيلاتدر كهالشواهدولاتحويهالمشاهدولاتراهالنواظرولاتحجبه
السواترالدالّ علىقدمهبحدوثخلقهوبحدوثخلقهعلىوجودهوبأشباههمعلىأن لا شِبْه له
الذي صدق في ميعاده وٱرتفع عن ظلم عباده وقام بالقسط في خلقه وعدل عليهم في
حكمه مستشهد بحدوث الأشياء على أزليّته وبما وسمها به من العجز على قدرته
وبماٱضطرّهاإليهمنالفناءعلىدوامهواحدلابعددودائملابأمدوقائملابعمدتتلقّاه ّ
لجتلبماهوألاهبطحتملةرضاحمباليئارَ ملاهلدهشتوةرعاشمبالناهذألا ىلهابها٢وبها
ٱمتنع منها وإليها حاكمها ليس بذي كبر ٱمتدّت به النهايات فكبّرته تجسيمًا ولا
بذي عظم تناهت به الغايات فعظّمته تجسيدًا بل كبر شانًا وعظم سلطانًا. وأشهدأنّ
محمّدًاعبده٣الصفيّ وأمينهالرضيّ٤صل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهأرسلهبوجوبالحجج ماقأو
اهيلع ا ً ّلاد ةّجحملا ىلع لمحو اهب اًعداص ةلاسرلا غّلبف جهنملا حاضيإو
جْلُفلا روهظو أعلام الاهتداء ومنار الضياء وجعل أمراس الإسلام متينة وعُرى
الإيمان وثيقة.
١ترتيبالخطب:ش،م:كماأثبتّهفيمتنالتحقيق.ن،ي،ھوشرحٱبنأبيالحديدوالبحرانيّ:
تأتيالخطب § ٣٨١ ٠٩١ -- بعدالخطبة § ٢٣٢ . ٢ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.م،وأصلش:
سقطت ⟩بها⟨. ٣م، ن، ھ: كذا. ش، ي: أضيفت ⟩ورسوله⟨. ٤م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش،
ھ:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش: ⟩عبدهالمصطفىوأمينهالرِّضٰى⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 419 I say what you hear and ask God's aid against my
passions and yours. He suffices us and he is the best trustee.1 1.182
From an address by ʿAlī to Burj ibn Mus'hir al-Ṭāʾī, one of the
Kharijites, when he called out in ʿAlī's hearing, ⟨No rule save
God's!⟩:2 Silence! May God disfigure you, you toothless driveller! By
God, when right showed itself, your arms offered feeble support and your
voice could not be heard, but when wrong snorted, you emerged like the
horns of a goat! 1.183 From an oration by ʿAlī:3 1.183.1
PraiseGod!Sensesdonotgrasphim,placesdonotholdhim,eyesdonot
seehim,andveilsdonothidehim.Heproveshisantiquitybythenewnessof his
creatures. By the newness of his creatures, he proves his existence, and
by their similarities, he proves that he has no peer. He is true to his
promise, rises above any wrong to his servants, upholds equity among his
creatures, and is just when he commands. The newness of all things
testifies to his eternity, the incapac- ity he has marked them with
testifies to his power, and the annihilation he has subjugated them to
testifies to his permanence. He is one without number, per-
manentwithoutend,standingwithoutneedof support.Themindreceiveshim
without touching him, all that we see testifies to his existence without
enter- ing his presence. The imagination cannot encompass him: rather,
he shows his light to it and in it, while he renders himself
inaccessible to it and by it, and he also summons it for judgment to it.
He possesses greatness, but not in the sense of flexible perimeters that
make him massive in body. He possesses might, but not in the sense of
expanding limits that make him grand in form. Rather, he is great in
majesty and mighty in power. I testify that Muḥammad is God's chosen
servant and his faithful trustee,
whomhesentwithcompellingarguments,cleardirection,andtriumphantvic- tory.
He conveyed God's message and announced it to all, showed people the
straight road and led them to it, raised banners of guidance and beacons
of light, fastened Islam's ropes and strengthened faith's bonds. 1
Modified quote from Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:173. 2 Presumably in Kufa, after
the arbitration in 37/658. See similar materials in §1.140 and §3.182. 3
Hārūnī (Taysīr, 273) places §1.183.1 in Kufa, sometime during his
caliphate 35--40/656--661, at the beginning of an oration he calls The
Radiant Oration (Gharrāʾ; Raḍī calls §1.80 in the present volume by that
name). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 420 Text and
Translation 1.183.2منها في صفة عجيب خلق أصناف من الحيوان ولو فكّروا في
عظيم القدرة وجسيم النعمة لرجعوا إلى الطريق وخافوا عذاب الحريق ولـكنّ
القلوب عليلة والأبصار مدخولة. ألا ينظرون إلى صغير ما خلق كيف أحكم خلقه
وأتقن تركيبه وفلق له السمع والبصر وسوّى له العَظْم والب َ ش َ ر. انظروا إلى
النملة في صغر جُثّتها ولطافة هيئتها لا تكاد تنال بلحظ النظر١ ولا بمستدرك
الفكر كيف دبّت اهّرح يف عمجت اهّرقتسم يف اهّدعُ تو اهرحُج ىلإ ةّبحلا لقنت اهقزر
ىلع ٢تّبُصو اهضرأ ىلع لبردها وفي ورودها لصَدَرها مكفول برزقها مرزوقة بوَفْقها٣
لا يغفلها المنّان ولا يحرمها الديّانولوفيالص
اهلفسواهّولعيفاهلكأيراجميفترّكفولوسماجلارجحلاوسبايلااف َ ّ وما في الجوف من
ش َ راسيف بطنها وما في الرأس من عينها وأذنها لقضيت من خلقها
رشيملاهمئاعدىلعاهانبواهمئاوقىلعاهماقأيذلاىلاعتفاً بعتاهفصونمتيقلواً بجع
كهفي كتّ لدام٤هتاياغغلبتلكركفبهاذميفتبرضولو.رداقاهقلخىلعهنعيملورطافاهترطف
الدلالة إلّا أنّ فاطر النملة هو فاطر النحلة٥ لدقيق تفصيل كلّ شيء وغامض
ٱختلاف كلّ حيّوماالجليلواللطيفوالثقيلوالخفيفوالقوي ّ والضعيففيخلقهإلّاسواء.
1.183.3كذلك السماء والهواء والرياح والماء فٱنظر إلى الشمس والقمر والنبات
والشجر والماء والحجر وٱختلافهذا الليل والنهار وتفجّرهذه البحار وكثرةهذه
الجبال وطول هذه القِلال وتفرّق هذه اللغات والألسن المختلفات. فالويل لمن
جحد المقدّر وأنكر المدبّر زعموا أنّهم كالنبات ما لهم زارع ولا لٱختلاف صورهم
صانع ولم يلجأوا إلى حجّة فيما ٱدّعوا ولا تحقيق لما أَوْعَوْا وهل يكون بناء من
غير بانٍ أو جناية من غير جانٍ. ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ:⟩البصر⟨.
٢م،ي،ونسخةفيھمععلامةالصحّة:كذا. ش، ن، وأصل ھ: ⟩ضنّت⟨. ٣ش، ن، م، ھ: كذا. ي:
⟩بوقتها⟨. ٤ش، م، ي، ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ھ، ونسخة في ش: ⟩غاياتك⟨.
٥ش، ن، ھ: كذا. م، ونسخة مع لفظة معًافيھ: ⟩النخلة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 421 1.183.2 From the same oration, describing the wondrous
creation of many species of animals: Had they contemplated the greatness
of his power and the vastness of his bounty, they would have returned to
the Path, and feared the punishment of the Fire. But hearts are sickly
and eyes diseased. Do they not observe the small- est of things he has
created, how he has perfected its creation, refined its form, provided
orifices for hearing and sight, and fashioned bones and skin? Observe
the ant in its tiny frame and delicate shape! It can hardly be spotted
by the eye or grasped by the mind, yet see how it crawls on the earth
and guards its food, transporting a single seed to its nest and stashing
it in its lair! It gath- ers in the hot season for the cold, in the time
of abundance for the time of dearth, its sustenance is guaranteed, and
its provisions are made to suit. The Great Benefactor does not ignore it
and the Great Rewarder does not deprive it, even when it lives on dry
rock and barren stone. And if you were to con- template the tracts
through which its food passes inside its parts, high and low, the
membranes of its stomach within its abdomen, and all that its head con-
tains, eyes, ears, and everything else, you would marvel at its creation
and be hard pressed to describe it. Exalted be the one who righted it
upon its legs and set it on its limbs! No partner assisted him to make
it, no power helped him in its creation! And if you were to follow the
path of your thought to its log- ical end, you would infer that the
maker of the ant is also the maker of the honeybee.1 Every creature has
subtle particulars, and every living being has imperceptible variances,
but with regard to their being created, the large, the slight, the
heavy, the light, the strong, the weak, all are the same---all are God's
creatures. 1.183.3 The case of sky, air, wind, and water is similar.
Observe the sun, moon, plants, trees, water, and rocks. Observe the
alternation of night and day, the roiling of the seas, the majesty of
the mountains, the loftiness of the mas- sifs, the diversity of
languages, and the variety of tongues. Woe to those who deny the Great
Ordainer, who reject the Great Planner! They claim they are like plants
without a cultivator, that there is no artisan who crafted their dif-
ferent forms, but they have no proof for their claim and no
justification for their belief. Can there ever be a building without a
builder, an act without an actor?2 1 Ar. naḥlah; Or, per mss M "the
date-palm (nakhlah)." 2 Lit. "Can there be a crime without a
perpetrator?"; my translation is in the generic sense of action,
following Ḥ13:65. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 422 Text and
Translation 1.183.4وإن شئت قلت في الجرادة إذ خلق لها عينين حَمْراوين وأسرج
لها حَدَقتين يوسلا مفلا اهل حتفو ّيفخلا عمسلا اهل لعجو نيَوارْمَ ق ّ وجعل لها
الحس ّ القوي نيَ بانو ّ اوبلجأولواهّبَذنوعيطتسيالومهعرزيفعاّرُ
ّزلااهبهريضبقتامهبنيلَجنِموضرقتامهب بجمعهم حتّى ترد الحرث في نزواتها وتقضي
منه شهواتها وخلقها كلّه لا يكون إصبعًا تاَواَم َ ّسلا يِف نَم﴿ هل دجسي يذلا
كرابتف ةّقدتسم ِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَ كَرْهًا﴾ويعفّر له .اً فوخو ةبهر دايقلا يطعيو
اًفعضو اً ملس هيلإ ةعاطلاب يقليو اًهجوو ا ً ّدخ فالطير مسخّرة لأمره أحصى عدد
الريش منها والنفَس وأرسى قوائمها على الندى َ بَ يلاو س قدّر أقواتها وأحصى
أجناسها فهذا غُراب وهذا عُقاب وهذا حَمام وهذا ن َ عام. اهمَسِق دّدعو اهمَ يِد
لطهأف لاقثلا باحسلا أشنأو هقزرب هل لفكو همسٱب رئاط ّلك اعد فب َ .اهبودُج
دعب اهتبن جرخأو اهفوفج دعب ضرألا َ ّل 1.184ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في
التوحيد وتجمع هذه الخطبة من أصول العلوم ما لا تجمعه خطبة 1.184.1الو ههّبش
نم ىنع هاّيإ الو هَ لَ ّثَم نم باصأ هتقيقح الو هَفَ ّيَك نَم هدّحو ام صَم َ ده من
أشار إليه وتوهّمهكلّ معروف بنفسه مصنوع وكلّ قائم في سواه معلول فاعل لا
بٱضطراب آلة مقدّر لا بج َ هدِفرَ ت الو تاقوألا هبحصت ال ةدافتسٱب ال ّينغ
ةركف لو الأدوات سبق الأوقات كونه والعدم وجوده والابتداء أزله بتشعيره
المشاعر عُرف ألّا مشعر له وبم ُ ضادّته بين الأمور عرف ألّا ضدّ له وبمقارنته
بين الأشياء عرف ألّا َ لَ بلاب دومجلاو ةمْهُبلاب حوضولاو ةملظلاب رونلا َ
ّداض هل نيرق ِّ لؤم .دَرَ ّصلاب رورَ حلاو ل ف بين متعادياتها مقارن بين
متبايناتها مقرّب بين متباعداتها مفرّق بين متدانياتها لا ي ُ شمل al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
423 1.183.4 If you wish, I can also speak of the locust. God gave it two
red eyes and within them he suspended two pupils, two moon-like orbs. He
fashioned for it
minuteearsandanopeningforamouth,gaveitkeensenses,twofang-liketeeth with
which to cut, and two scythe-like forelegs with which to grip. Farmers
dread their ravages---even if they join forces, they can't drive the
locusts away until they've inflicted their violence on the crops and
satisfied their hunger, yet all the while each one measures no more than
a tiny finger! Blessed is he before whom «all who are in the skies and
the earth, obedient or unwilling,»1 fall pros- trate!They press their
cheeks and faces to the earth, throw down their weapons in a vulnerable
plea for amnesty, and offer their reins to him in awe and fear! The
birds are also subject to his command. He reckons the number of their
feathers and their breaths, keeps their feet firm on wet land and dry,
ordains their food, and knows their innumerable species. This one is a
crow, that an eagle, this one a pigeon, that an ostrich. He calls each
bird by its name, and he guarantees its sustenance. Quickening heavy
clouds,2 drawing forth pour- ing rain, and enumerating appointed
bounties, he drenches the land after it was parched and prompts it to
germinate after it was barren. 1.184 From an oration by ʿAlī on God's
oneness that brings together principles of knowledge like no other:
1.184.1 Thosewhoassignhimaformhavenotacknowledgedhisoneness,those who
liken him have not hit upon his reality, those who compare him have not
denoted him, those who point to him or imagine him have not directed
them- selves to him. Each entity that is known in its essence is
constructed, and each entity that stands with another's support is a
result. God acts without imple- ments, he ordains without thought, he is
wealthy without acquisition. Time does not accompany him, and appendages
do not attend him. His being pre- cedes time, his existence precedes
non-existence, and his eternity precedes the beginning. By his forming
of the senses, we know that he has no senses, by his creation of
opposites, we know that he has no rival, by his design of similarities,
we know that he has no peer. He made light the opposite of darkness,
clarity the opposite of gloom, dry the opposite of wet, and heat the
opposite of cold. He joined what was disparate, gathered what was
distinct, brought close the things that were far, and separated those
that were near. He cannot be confined 1 Qurʾan, Raʿd 13:15. 2 Modified
quote from Qurʾan, Raʿd 13:12. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 424 Text and
Translation بحدّ ولا يحسب ب ِ عَدّ وإنّما تَح ُ دّ الأدوات أنفسها وتشير الآلات
إلى نظائرها. منعتها منذ القِدْمةوحمتهاق َ
دُالأزليّةوجنّبتهالولاالتكملة.بهاتجل ّ ىصانعهاللعقولوبهاٱمتنععننظر
العيون.لايجريعليهالسكونوالحر كةوكيفيجريعليهماهوأجراهويعودفيهماهو
أبداهويحدثفيهماهوأحدثهإذًالتفاوتتذاتهولتجزّأكنههولٱمتنعمنالأزلمعناه
ولكانلهوراءٌإذوجدلهأمامٌولٱلتمسالتمامإذلزمهالنقصانوإذًالقامتآيةالمصنوع فيه
ولتحوّل دليل ً ا بعد أن كان مدلولًا عليه وخرج بسلطان الامتناع من أن يؤثّر
فيه ما يؤثّر في غيره. 1.184.2الذي لا يحول ولا يزول ولا يجوز عليه الأفول
لم يلد فيكون مولودًا ولم يولد فيصير١محدودًاجلّ
عنٱتّخاذالأبناءوطهرعنملامسةالنساءلاتنالهالأوهامفتقدّره
ولاتتوهّمهالفطنفتصوّرهولاتدر كهالحواس ّ فت ُ حِسّهولاتلمسهالأيديفتمسّهلايتغيّر
بحال ولا يتبدّل في الأحوال ولا تبليه الليالي والأيّام ولا يغيّره الضياء
والظلام ولا يوصف بشيء من الأجزاء ولا بالجوارح والأعضاء ولا بعرض من
الأعراض ولا بالغيريّةوالأبعاض.ولايقاللهحدّولانهايةولاٱنقطاعولاغايةولاأنّ
الأشياءتحويه فت ُ قِل ّ ِ ب ءايشألا يف سيل .هلدعي وأ هليميف هلمحي اً ئيش
ّنأ وأ هيوهُت وأ ه جـِ لاو ٍ ولا عنها بخارج يخـبر لا بلسان ولهوات ويسمع لا
بخروق وأدوات يقول ولا يلفظ ويحفظ ولا يتحفّظ ويريد ولا يضمر يحب ّ ويرضى من
غير رقّة ويبغض ويغضب من غير مشقّة. يقول لما أراد كونه ﴿كُن َ يَ ف ْ كُوْن﴾لا
بصوت يقرع ولا نداء يسمع وإنّما كلامه سبحانه فعل
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩فيكون⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 425 by a limit or reckoned by counting, for instruments can
only limit other instru- ments, and implements can only indicate similar
things. "Since" prevents them from antiquity, "just" precludes them from
eternity, and "if not for" drives them from perfection.1 Through these
things, the artisan who crafted them displays his light to intellects,
yet because of these things, it is impossible for eyes to see him.
Stillness and motion do not apply to him. How can something he set forth
apply to him? How can something he originated become part of him? How
can something he made happen, happen to him? If that were the case, his
being would have contrasting modes, his essence would be divided into
parts, and it would be impossible for his reality to be eternal. If he
had a front, he would also have a back, if he were incomplete, he would
need completing, and if that were the case, the mark of craftsmanship
would appear in him. He would become a sign instead of something to
which all signs point. But---through the utter impossibility of that
being the case---nothing that affects his creatures affects God. 1.184.2
He is the one who never changes, never ceases, never sets. He has not
begotten, else he himself would be like one born, he was not begotten,
else he would be constrained.2 His glory precludes begetting sons, his
purity pre- cludes intimacy with women. The imagination cannot attain or
measure him, the intellect cannot imagine or picture him, our senses
cannot grasp or sense him, our hands cannot touch or feel him. No
situation causes him to change, no conditions cause him to alter.The
passage of night and day do not cause him to decay, light and dark do
not cause him to transform. He cannot be described as possessing parts,
or limbs and organs, or segments, or accidental qualities that can
change, or the trait of being other than something, or comprised of sec-
tions. It cannot be said of him that he has limit, end, termination,
conclusion, or that things control him so as to raise or lower him, or
that things carry him so as to balance him or cause him to incline. He
neither enters into things nor exits them. He informs without tongue or
mouth. He hears without ears or any other organ. He speaks without
uttering, remembers without memorizing, and wills without pondering. He
loves and is pleased without sentiment, he hates and is angry without
toil. For anything whose being he wills, he says «"Be!"--- and it is,»3
without emitting a sound that strikes the ear, or a call that can be 1
Ar. mundhu, qad, and law-lā. These words distinguish creatures from the
creator, to whom none of these terms apply, for they imply coming into
existence, being newly created, and imperfection. 2 Reference to Qurʾan,
Ikhlāṣ112:3. 3 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:117. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 426 Text
and Translation ناك لاقي ال .اًيناث اًهٰلإ ناكل اً ميدق ناك ولو اًنئاك كلذ
لبق نم نكي مل هلّثمو هأشنأ هنم بعد أن لم يكن فت ُ جرى عليه الصفات
المحدثات ولا يكون بينها وبينه فصل ولا له عليها فضل فيستوي الصانع
والمصنوع ويتكافأ المبتدع والبديع. 1.184.3خلق الخلائق على غير مثال خلا من
غيره ولم يستعن على خلقها بأحد من خلقه وأنشأ الأرض فأمسكها من غير ٱشتغال
وأرساها على غير قرار وأقامها بغير قوائم ورفعهابغيردعائموحص ّ
نهامنالأَوَدوالاعوجاجومنعهامنالتهافتوالانفراج.أرسى ُ هَي ملف اهتيدوأ َ ّدَخو
اهنويع ضافتسٱو اهدادسأ برضو اهداتوأ ن ما بناه ولا ضعف ما قوّاه هو الظاهر
عليها بسلطانه وعظمته وهو الباطن لها بعلمه ومعرفته والعالي على كلّ شيء
منها بجلاله وعزّته لا يعجزه شيء منها طلبه ولا يمتنع عليه فيغلبه ولا يفوته
السريعمنهافيسبقهولايحتاجإلىذيمالفيرزقه.خضعتالأشياءلهوذل ّ تمستكينة
لعظمته لا تستطيع الهرب من سلطانه إلى غيره فتمتنع من نفعه وضرّه. ولا كفو
له فيكافيه ولا نظير له فيساويه. 1.184.4هو المفني لها بعد وجودها حتّى يصير
موجودها كمفقودها وليس فناء الدنيا بعد ٱبتداعها بأعجب من إنشائها
وٱختراعها وكيف ولو ٱجتمع جميع حَي َ وانها من طيرها وبهائمها وما كان من
مُراحها وسائمها وأصناف أسناخها وأجناسها ومتبل ّ دة أممها وأكياسها على
إحداث ب َ عوضة ما قدرت على إحداثها ولا عرفت كيف السبيل إلى إيجادها
ولتحيّرت عقولها في علم ذلك وتاهت وعجزت قواها وتناهت ورجعت خاسية حسيرة
عارفة بأنّها مقهورة مقرّة بالعجز عن إنشائها مذعنة بالضعف عن إفنائها وأنّه
يعود سبحانه بعد فناء الدنيا وحده لا شيء معهكما كان قبل ٱبتدائها كذلك
يكون بعد فنائها بلا وقت ولا مكان ولا حين ولا زمان ع ُ دمت عند ذلك الآجال
والأوقات al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
427 heard. Rather, his speaking of words is itself an act that he
created and formed. His words did not exist before, for if they had been
present from antiquity, they would have constituted a second god. It
cannot be said of him that he came into being after non-existence, or
else the attributes of newly created beings would apply to him, there
would be no difference then between him and them, nor would he possess
any distinction over them. The craftsman and his craft would become the
same, the initiator and the initiated would become equal. 1.184.3 He
created his creation without using an earlier model, without seek- ing
help from any of his creatures. Forming the earth, he held it firm with-
out labor, anchored it without a seabed, erected it without supports,
raised it without pillars, ensured it was safe from bending and
buckling, and secured it from disintegration and rupture. He then set
down its stakes, established its barriers, released its wellsprings, and
furrowed its valleys. What he built never becomes unstable, what he
strengthened never becomes weak. He is powerful over it through his
authority and glory, he is concealed within it through his knowledge and
recognition, he is lofty above all things through his magnificence and
might. Nothing that he seeks eludes him, nothing can stand up against
him or overpower him, no creature can outrun or outstrip him, he needs
no wealthy benefactor to sustain him. All things bow to him and efface
themselves before his majesty. No one can flee his power or be free of
his benefit or harm. He has no equal to match him, no peer to rival him.
1.184.4 He will annihilate the world after its existence, until
everything that existed in it will be lost. But the annihilation of the
world after its creation is no more marvelous than its origination and
formation. How could it not be so? For if all the world's living beings
came together---its birds and its beasts, all its cattle in stables and
pastures, all its many species in terms of their ori- gins and types,
the dullards among its nations and the clever---if they all came
together to try to create a gnat, they could not, they would never find
a way to bring it into existence. Their minds would be dazed by the
attempt to know how, their faculties would be perplexed and
incapacitated and would retreat, beaten and weary, recognizing defeat,
conceding their incapacity to bring it into existence, and acknowledging
that they are too weak even to cause its destruction. God will once
again be alone after the annihilation of this world--- nothing else will
exist with him. As he was before its beginning, so will he be
afteritsend,beyondseason,place,moment,ortime.Lifespansandseasonswill
become non-existent, years and hours will cease. Nothing will remain
save the al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 428 Text and
Translation وزالت السنون والساعات فلا شيء إلّا الواحد القهّار الذي إليه
مصير جميع الأمور بلا
قدرةمنهاكانٱبتداءخلقهاوبغيرٱمتناعمنهاكانفناؤهاولوقدرتعلىالامتناعلدام
بقاؤها. 1.184.5اهنّوكيملوهقلخوهأربامقلخاهنمهْدُؤَ
يملوهعنصذإاهنمءيشعنصهْدَءاكتيمل لتشديد سلطان ولا خوف من زوال ونقصان ولا
للاستعانة بها على ن ِ دّ مكاثر ولا للاحتراز بها من ضدّ مثاور ولا للازدياد
بها في ملـكه ولا لمكاثرة شريك في شر كه ولا لوحشةكانت منه فأراد أن يستأنس
إليها. ثمّهو يفنيها بعد تكوينها لا لسأم دخل عليه ّ لمُ ي ال هيلع اهنم ءيش
لقثل الو هيلإ ةلصاو ةحارل الو اهريبدتو اهفيرصت يف ه طول بقائها فيدعوَه
إلى سرعة إفنائها لـكنّه سبحانه دبّرها بلطفه وأمسكها بأمره وأتقنها بقدرته
ثمّ يعيدها بعد الفناء من غير حاجة منه إليها ولا ٱستعانة بشيء منها عليه
ولا لٱنصراف من حال وحشة إلى حال ٱستيناس ولا من حال جهل وعمى إلى علم
وٱلتماس ولا من فقر وحاجة إلى غنى وكثرة ولا من ذلّ وضعة إلى عزّ وقدرة.
1.185ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في الملاحم ألا بأبي وأمّي هم من عدّة أسماؤهم
في السماء معروفة وفي الأرض مجهولة. ألا فتوقّعوا ما يكون من إدبار أمور كم
وٱنقطاع وُصَلـكم وٱستعمال صغار كم ذاك حيث تكون ضربة السيف على المؤمن أهون
من الدرهم من حِل ّ ه ذاك حيث يكون المعطى أعظم أجرًا ريغ نم نوفلحُتو ميعنلاو
ةمعَ ّنلا نم لب بارش ريغ نم نوركست ثيح كاذ يطعملا نم ٱضطرار وتكذبون من
غير إحراج ذاك إذا عضّكم البلاء كما ي َ عَض ّ القَت َ ب ُ غارب َ البعير.
اهُروهظ لمحَ ت يتلا ةّمِزَألا هذه اوقلأ سانلا اهّيأ .ءاجرلا اذه دعبأو ءانعلا
اذه لوطأ ام الأثقالَ من أيديكم ولا تصدّعوا على سلطانكم فتذمّوا غِب ّ ف َ
عالـكم ولا تقتحموا ما al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
429 one, the vanquisher, to whom all affairs return. The beginning of
their creation
tookplacewithouttheirvolition,theirannihilationtoowillcomewithoutthem
having the power to arrest its march. If they had been able to, they
would have existed forever. 1.184.5 Crafting any part of what he crafted
caused him no hardship. Cre- ating what he created, what he formed,
caused him no fatigue. He did not bring his creatures into being in
order to consolidate his authority, or from fear of cessation or loss,
or to bolster his worth against a wealthier peer, or to protect himself
from an avenging enemy, or to expand his kingdom, or to boast of greater
riches to a partner, or out of loneliness such that he wanted the
comfort of their company. Now, after bringing the world into being, he
will annihilate it, but not because he is wearied by planning and
running it, or to seek rest, or because any of it weighs him down. Its
long existence does not tire him and require him to annihilate it
swiftly. He has planned it through his grace, upheld it with his
command, and perfected it with his power. After annihilating it, he will
bring it back again. This, too, without hav- ing a need for it, without
seeking help from any creature to create it, or to emerge from a state
of loneliness to a state of comfort, or from a state of igno- rance and
blindness to knowledge and attainment, or from poverty and desti- tution
to wealth and abundance, or from shame and abjectness to might and
power. 1.185 From an oration by ʿAlī prophesying a calamitous time:1 I
would offer my father and mother as ransom for that host whose names are
recognized in the heavens but remain unknown on earth. Hark, people,
pre- pare for what is coming! Your affairs will soon turn topsy turvy,
your ties will soon be severed. Only the rash among you will find
employment. On that day, it will be easier for a believer to suffer the
blow of a sword than to earn a single dirham through licit means. On
that day, the receiver will be rewarded more than the giver.2 On that
day, you will become intoxicated, not from drink, but with luxury and
affluence, you will swear gratuitous oaths and lie without scruple. On
that day, calamity will bite like a packsaddle biting into a camel's
withers.Ohowlengthythehardship,howdistantthehope!People!Stopdriving
beasts you have loaded with sin! Stop challenging your authorities, or
you will 1 Excerpt from an oration ʿAlī delivered in Kufa after the
Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658. Ḥ6:134-- 135, after Madāʾinī (the
preceding lines are also recorded). 2 Because those who give at this
time will do so from illicit earnings, while those who receive will do
so legitimately. Ḥ13:96--97; B 712; F 350; R 2:440. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 430 Text
and Translation ٱستقبلتم من ف َ كلهي يرمعل دقف .اهل ليبسلا دصق اوّلخو اهنَ
نَس نع اوطيمأو ةنتفلا ران رو في لهبها المؤمن ويسلم فيها غير المسلم.
1.186ومن خطبة له عليه السلام أوصيكم أيّها الناس بتقوى الله وكثرة حمده على
آلائه إليكم ونعمائه عليكم وبلائه لديكم فكم خص ّ كم بنعمة وتدارككم برحمة
أعورتم له فستر كم وتعرّضتم لأخذه فأمهلـكم وأوصيكم بذ سيل نميف مكعمطو
مكـلفغُ ي سيل اّمع مكتلفغ فيكو هنع ةلفغلا لالقإو توملا رك يمهلـكم. فكفى
واعظًا بموت ٰ ى عاينتموهم حُملوا إلى قبورهم غير راكبين وأنزلوا فيها غير
نازلين كأنّهم لم يكونوا للدنيا عُمّارًا وكأنّ الآخرة لم تزل لهم دارًا أَوحشوا
ما كانوا يوطِنون وأوطنوا ما كانوا يوحشون وٱشتغلوا بما فارقوا وأضاعوا ما
إليه ٱنتقلوا لا عن قبيح يستطيعون ٱنتقالًا ولا في حسن يستطيعون ٱزديادًا
أنسوا بالدنيا فغرّتهم ووثقوا بها فصرعتهم. فسابقوا رحمكم الله إلى منازلـكم
التي أمرتم أن تعمروها والتي رُغّبتم فيها ودعيتم إليها وٱستتمّوا نعم الله
عليكم بالصبر على طاعته والمجانبة لمعصيته فإنّ غدًا من اليومقريب ما أسرع
الساعات ِ في اليوم وأسرع الأيّامَفي الشهر وأسرع الشهورَفي السنة وأسرع
السنين في العمر. 1.187ومن خطبة له عليه السلام al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 431 denouncetheresultsof
youraction!Stoprushingintosedition'sragingfire,stay away from its path,
leave its road empty! By my life, I fear believers will perish in its
flames, while non-Muslims will stay safe! 1.186 From an oration by
ʿAlī:1 People! I counsel you to be conscious of God and to give abundant
thanks for his bounties to you, his blessings on you, and his favors for
you. How often has he singled you out for a blessing and rescued you
with an act of mercy! You revealed your shame, and he concealed it, you
put yourself in the way of his
punishment,andhegrantedyoureprieve.Icounselyoutorememberdeathand lessen
your neglect! How can you forget something which will not forget you?
How can you place your hopes in something which will not grant you
reprieve? The dead whom you have seen with your own eyes are sufficient
counselors. They are carried to their graves, not riding there, then
placed inside without choosing to dismount, as though they had never
lived merrily in the world, as though the hereafter had always been
their home. Now, they recoil from their earlier abode, they make their
home in that place from which they had ear- lier recoiled. Long did they
occupy themselves with concerns they now have to leave behind! Long did
they ignore the cares to which they are now trans- ported!2 Now, they
cannot run away from their vile deeds or increase their stock of good.
They became familiar and comfortable with the world, and she deceived
them. They trusted her, and she hurled them to the ground. People, race
toward the home that you have been commanded to inhabit---may God have
mercy on you!---the one to which you have been urged and invited. Seek
the completion of God's blessings through obedience, do good and shun
sin, for tomorrow is close to today. O how swift the passage of hours in
a day! How swift the passage of days in a month! Howswift the passage of
months in a year! How swift the passage of years in a lifetime! 1.187
From an oration by ʿAlī:3 1 Excerpt from ʿAlī's oration soon after his
accession to the caliphate in Medina, when he was informed that Ṭalḥah
and Zubayr had rebelled. Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 109--111. 2
Or,"Theyareoccupiedwithpayingforthethingstheyhavehadtoleavebehind,havingsquan-
dered the opportunity to prepare for that to which they are now
transported." Ḥ13:100. 3 This could be an excerpt from an early oration
in Medina in 35--36/356, since the penultimate line, "Ask me before you
lose me," is said to be the prompt for Dhiʿlib's question about seeing
God and ʿAlī's answer in §1.177 (Ṣadūq, Amālī, 423, Majlis no. 55; see
note there), set in Med- ina. But, on the other hand, the line also
occurs in §90.2, from the late Kufa period, ca. 38/658, and in another
oration in Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 145--147---the line appears to be a
recurrent one in ʿAlī's orations, from the beginning of his caliphate to
the end. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 432 Text and
Translation يراوَع نوكي ام هنمو بولقلا يف اً ّرِقتسم اًتباث نوكي ام ناميإلا
نمف ّ بين القلوب والصدور إلى أجل معلوم. فإذا كانت لـكم براءة من أحد
فقفوه حتّى يحضره الموت فعند ذلك يقع حدّ البراءة. والهجرة قائمة على حدّها
الأوّل ما كان لله تعالى في أهل الأرض حاجة من مستسِرّالأمّة ومعلنها لا يقع
ٱسم الهجرة على أحد إلّا بمعرفة الح ُ جّة في الأرض فمن عرفها وأقرّبها فهو
مهاجر ولا يقع ٱسم الاستضعاف على من بلغته الحجّة فسمعتها أذنه ووعاها قلبه.
إنّ أمرنا صعب مستصعَب لا يحتمله إلّا عبد ٱمتحن الله
قلبهللإيمان١ولايعيحديثناإلّاصدورأمينةوأحلامرزينة.أيّهاالناسسَلونيقبلأن
تفقدوني فل َ أَنا بطرق السماء أعلم منّي بطرق الأرض قبل أن ت َ شغَر برِجلها
فتنة تطأ في خِطامها وتذهب بأحلام قومها. 1.188ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ّنأ
دهشأو .دجملا ميظع دنجلا زيزع هقوقح فئاظو ىلع هنيعتسأو هماعنإل اً ركش
هدمحأ محمّدًا عبده ورسوله دعا إلى طاعته وقاهر أعداءه جهادًا عن دينه لا
يثنيه عن ذلك ٱجتماع على تكذيبه وٱلتماس لإطفاء نوره. ١ن، م، ش، ھ: كذا. ي:
⟩لاتحمله إلّا ملك مقرّبأو نبيّ مرسلأو مؤمنٱمتحنالله إلّا عبد
ٱمتحناللهقلبهللإيمان⟨.وأضيفتفيهامشش: ⟩ملكمقرّبأونبيّ مرسلأومؤمن⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
433 Some people's hearts are firm and steadfast in belief, while for
others belief is a temporary loan lodged between heart and breast. If
you wish to dissociate from anyone, wait until death comes to him---that
is the point at which dis- sociation becomes appropriate.1 Migration
continues to be required as it was when first mandated,2 although God
has no need of any of the earth's people, neither those who conceal
their affiliation to this community, nor those who declare it publicly.3
Moreover, the honor of migration is not earned by a person unless he
recognizes God's proof on earth.4 To recognize and acknowledge this
proof is to be a true migrant. The phrase "too weak" does not apply to
anyone whom God's proof reaches, that is, if his ears hear it and his
heart preserves it.5 Our affair is hard and challenging, and only a
person whose heart God has tested with belief can bear it patiently. Our
words are preserved only by trusted hearts and mature minds. People! Ask
me before you lose me, for I know more about the pathways of the heavens
than I do about the pathways of the earth! Do this before sedition
rushes to attack, raising its hind-foot, trampling on its nose-rein, and
destroying people's minds. 1.188 From an oration by ʿAlī:6 I offer
praise to God in thanks for his blessings and ask his aid in upholding
his rights. His army is mighty, and his nobility great. I bear testimony
that Muḥam- mad is his servant and messenger, who called on people to
obey God and vanquished his enemies, fighting tirelessly to defend his
religion. They banded together to call him a liar and attempted to
extinguish his light, but they could not turn him away from his purpose.
1 I.e., see whether the person dies a believer or an unbeliever before
you cast him off. 2 Ar. hijrah. The first migration refers to the
migration to Medina, the Prophet Muḥammad's city, following his own
migration there from Mecca. 3
Translationbasedonreadingmāasanegationandthetwosentencesasindependentclauses,
based on B 717; R 2:444--445. If we read mā to be the particle that
means "as long as," the two lines would be combined into one clause
(cf. Ḥ13:103), and would translate quite differently as: "Migration
continues to be required as it was when first mandated, as long as God
has need of any of the earth's people, those who conceal their
affiliation to this community and those who declare it publicly." 4 The
Shiʿi commentators Baḥrānī (B 717--718) and Rāwandī (R 2:444--445) state
that "God's proof" is the Imam. The Sunni Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
(Ḥ13:103--104) says this passage is about the "secrets of legatee-ship,"
and it refers to migration toward the Imam, ʿAlī himself. Both are
effectively saying the same thing. 5 Reference to Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:97,
which excuses people who are "too weak" from migrating to Medina. 6
Called one of ʿAlī's most eloquent orations, especially for the rhythmic
and graphic descrip- tion of hellfire; echoed later by Ibn Nubātah
al-Khaṭīb (d. 374/985) (Ḥ13:114; B 725). The last paragraph about
standing fast is interpreted variously: ʿAlī is either (1) instructing
his Kufan supporters not to be hasty in drawing swords against the
Kharijites (Ḥ13:113); or (2) directing his followers never to draw
swords in the absence of the rightful Imam (B 725); possibly both.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 434 Text and
Translation فٱعتصموابتقوىاللهفإنّ لهاحبل ً اوثيقًاعروتهومعقل ً
امنيعًاذروته.وبادرواالموت وغمراتهوٱمهدوالهقبلحلولهوأعدّوالهقبلنزولهفإنّ
الغايةالقيامةوكفىبذلكواعظًا ةّدشو سامرألا قيض نم نوملعت ام ةياغلا غولب
لبقو لهج نمل اًرَ بتعمو لقع نمل الإبلاسوهولالم ُ َ ل َ ّط
عوروعاتالفزعوٱختلافالأضلاعوٱستِكاكالأسماعوظلمة اللحد وخيفة الوعد وغمّ
الضريح ورَدْم الصفيح. فالله َالله َعباد الله فإنّ الدنيا ماضية بكم على سَنن
وأنتم والساعة في ق َ ر َ ن وكأنّها قد جاءت بأشراطها وأَزِف َ ت بأفراطها
ووقفت بكمعلىس ِ
راطها١وكأنّهاقدأشرفتبزلازلهاوأناختبكلاكلهاوٱنصرمت٢الدنيابأهلها اهنيمسو اً
ّثَر اهديدج راصو ىضقنٱ رهشو ىضم مويك تناكف اهنضِح نم مهتجرخأو عطاس اهبَ جَل
ٍلاع اهُبَ لَك ٍديدش ٍرانو ماظع ةهبتشم رومأو ماقملا كنَض فقوم يف اً ّثَغ َ هَ ل
بها متغيّظ زفيرها متأج ّ ج سعيرها بعيد خُمودها ذاكٍ وُقودها مَخوف وعيدها عَمٍ
قرارها ُ ه َ ّبَراْوَقَ ّتا َنيذلا َقيِسَو﴿.اهرومأةعيظفاهرودقةيماحاهراطقأةملظم
َ ل ِإ ْم ﴾اًرَمُزِةَ ّنَ جْلاى
قدأُمنالعذابوٱنقطعالعِتابوزُحزحواعنالناروٱطمأنّتبهمالدارورضواالمثوى والقرار
الذين كانت أعمالهم في الدنيا زاكية وأعينهم باكية وكان ليلهم في دنياهم
نهارًا تخشّعًا وٱستغفارًا وكان نهارهم ليل ً ا توحّشًا وٱنقطاعًا فجعل الله لهم
الجنّة ثوابًا ﴿وَ َ لْهَأَواَ هِب َ ّقَحَأاوُ ناَك
هَا﴾فيملكدائمونعيمقائم.فٱرعواعباداللهمابرعايتهيفوزفائز كم
امبنونيدَمومتفلسأامبنونَ
هترممّكنإفمكـلامعأبمكـلاجآاوردابومكـلطبمرسخيهتعاضإبو قدّمتم وكأن قد نزل
بكم المخوف فلا رجعة تنالون ولا عثرة ت ُ قالون. استعملنا الله وإيّاكم
بطاعته وطاعة رسوله وعفا عنّا وعنكم بفضل رحمته. ١م،ن،ش:كذا.ي،ھ: ⟩صراطها⟨.
٢ن،ھ،ش،ونسخةفيي:كذا.م،وأصلي،ونسخة فيش: ⟩وٱنصرفت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 435 Take refuge, people, in consciousness of God, for its
rope has a strong grip, and its refuge is on an impregnable height.
Hasten to prepare for the engulf- ing pangs of death, make ready before
it arrives. Know that the resurrection is the final end---enough counsel
for the perceptive, enough lesson for the igno- rant! But even before
you arrive at that terminus, you know well what you will
encounter:thenarrowconfinesof earth-filledgraves,thesheerabyssof
despair, the terror of the prospect, the disintegration of ribs, the
blocking of ears, the darknessof thetomb,thefearof
theportent,andthehorrorof thatcryptsealed with slabs of stone! Fear him,
servants of God, fear him! The world, as is her wont, is sweeping you
along, your rope tethered to her last hour, whose heralds are here and
whose dawn glimmers. The hour has already stood you in readi- ness to
meet it on its concourse. It will arrive any moment now. Imagine that
its earthquakes are already here, as though its brutish chest is already
crush- ing out your breath, as though the world has already cut her ties
with you, her children, and hurled you from her lap! Indeed, your world
is like a day that has already passed, and a month that has already
ended, the new in her has worn out, the healthy are wasted and thin. All
in her proceed to an assembly that is tight and narrow, to matters that
are grave and dark. Ahead lies a fire of rabid thirst, whose roar is
deafening, whose flames rise high, whose crackle rages, whose
conflagration is fierce and slow to extinguish, whose inferno blazes,
whose threat is terrifying, whose pit is unfathomable, whose sides are
dark, whose cauldrons are iron-hot, and everything about it is horrific.
But «those who were conscious of their Lord will be led in groups into
paradise»,1 secure from punishment, safe from reprimand, snatched from
the clutches of hellfire. Paradise will delight in their arrival, and
they will rejoice in their new dwelling, their permanent home. These are
people whose deeds in this world were righ- teous, whose eyes were full
of tears, whose nights were spent as daylight hours in humble entreaty
to God for forgiveness, whose days were spent as night- time vigils in
alienation and separation from the world. God rewarded them with
paradise---«and they were worthy of it and deserving!»2---with life in
the eternalkingdom,ineverlastingbliss.Servantsof
God,staythecoursewhoseful- filment will lead you to triumph, but whose
squandering will hand you defeat. Outrace your lifespans with good
deeds, for you remain mortgaged to your past actions and will be
rewarded for what you advance. The time that you dread is almost upon
you, when no return to the world can be availed, no fall can be averted.
May God help us to obey him and his Messenger! May he forgive us with
his kind mercy! 1 Qurʾan, Zumar 39:73. 2 Qurʾan, Fatḥ48:26. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 436 Text and
Translation الزموا الأرض وٱصبروا على البلاء ولا تحرّ كوا بأيديكم وسيوفكم
هوى ألسنتكم ولا تستعجلوا بما لم يعجّله الله لـكم فإنّه من مات منكم على
فراشه وهو على معرفة حقّ ربّه نم ىوَ ن ام باوث بجوتسٱو هللا ىلع هرجأ عقوو
اًديهش تام هتيب لهأو هلوسر ّقحو صالح عمله وقامت النيّة مقام إصلاته بسيفه
فإنّ لكلّ شيء مدّة وأجل ً ا. 1.189ومن خطبة له عليه السلام هئالآو ١ماؤُ ّتلا
همعن ىلع هدمحأ هّدج يلاعتملاو هدنج بلاغلاو هُدمح يشافلا هللا دمحلا العظام
الذي عظم حلمه فعفا وعدل في كلّ ما قضى وعلم ما يمضي وما مضى مبتدع الخلائق
بعلمه ومنشئهم بحكمه بلا ٱقتداء ولا تعليم ولا ٱحتذاء لمثال صانع حكيم ولا
إصابة خطأ ولا حضرة ملأ. وأشهد أنّ محمدًا عبده ورسوله ٱبتعثه والناس يضربون
في .نيَ ّرلا لافقأ مهتدئفأ ىلع تقلغتسٱو نيَ ـحلا ةّمِزَأ مهتداق دق ةريح يف
نوجوميو ةرمغ أوصيكمعباداللهبتقوىاللهفإنّهاحقّ
اللهعليكموالموجبةعلىاللهحقّكموأنتستعينوا قيرطلا دغ يفو ةّنـُ جلاو زْرِحلا
مويلا يف ىوقتلا ّنإف .هللا ىلع اهب اونيعتستو هللاب اهيلع إلى الجنّة
مسلـكها واضح وسالـكها رابح ومستودَعها حافظ. لم تبرح عارضة نفسها على الأمم
الماضين والغابرين لحاجتهم إليها غدًا إذا أعاد الله ما أبدا وأخذ ما أعطى
وسأل عمّا أسدى فما أقلّ من قبلها وحملها حقّ حملها أولئك الأقلّون عددًا وهم
أهل صفة نِم ٌليِ لَ قَو﴿ لوقي ذإ هناحبس هللا اوظِكاوو اهيلإ مكعامسأب ٢اوعطهأف
.﴾ُروُك َ ّشلا يِداَ بِع ْ بجِدّكم عليها وٱعتاضوها من كلّ سلف خلفًا ومن كلّ مخالف
موافقًا أيقظوا بها نومكم
وٱقطعوابهايومكموأشعروهاقلوبكموٱرحضوابهاذنوبكموداووابهاالأسقاموبادروابها
الحِماموٱعتبروابمنأضاعهاولايعتبرنّ بكممنأطاعهاألاوصونوهاوتصوّنوابها.وكونوا
هتعفر نم اوعفرت الو ىوقتلا هتعفر نم اوعضت الو اًهاّلُو ةرخآلا ىلإو اًهاّزُ ن
ايندلا نع .⟨ّماوَ ّتلا⟩ :ميفةخسنو،ن.اذك:ھ،ي،ش،م١
٢م،ي،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصل ش: ⟩فٱنقطعوا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 437 People, stand fast in your land and be patient in the
face of trial. Don't follow your hot tongues with drawn swords, don't
rush into something that God has not urged you to. Know that if one of
you dies in his bed, if he has recognized the right of his Lord, his
Messenger, and the Messenger's family, he dies a mar- tyr, and God
guarantees his recompense. He has earned reward for his pious intention,
and that intention is equal to him unsheathing his sword. Know that
everything has a time and a term. 1.189 From an oration by ʿAlī: Praise
God, whose praise is pervasive, whose armies are victorious, whose
greatness is exalted. I offer thanks for his multiplied blessings and
immense favors: his clemency is vast, and he pardoned; he was just in
all he ordained; he knows all that will happen and all that already has,
he originated all creatures by his knowledge, he conceived them all
through his wisdom---no imitation or instruction, no emulation of prior
artisan, no mistake made, no advisors present. I bear witness that
Muḥammad is his servant and messenger, dis- patched when people were
swamped in confusion, tossed on waves of devi- ation, led by reins of
destruction, hearts clamped in padlocks of grime. I counsel you to
piety, to be conscious of God, O servants of God, for it is God's right
that you owe to him, and it will earn you rights from God. I counsel you
to seek God's help to become pious, and seek to become pious in order to
please God. Piety is a refuge today and protection, and it is tomorrow's
path to the celestial garden. Piety's way is clear, those who walk it
profit, and he who guarantees your deposit of it is trustworthy. Piety
presented itself to past nations and will do so to those that remain.
They will have need of it tomor- row, when God recalls what he created,
takes back what he gave, and asks for an accountof
hisgifts.Buthowrarethepeoplewhowerepious,howfewwhoprac- ticed it well!
Those are the few in number, the people whom God has praised, when he
said, «few among my servants are truly grateful.»1 So dedicate your ears
to piety's call and apply your efforts to responding. Exchange your past
wrongs for it, make it your ally against foes. Use it to wake you from
your sleep, get through your days with its help. Infuse your hearts with
it, scrub off your sins with it, heal your maladies with it, outpace
your death with it. Be warned by those who squandered it, let others not
take warning from your terrible end. Hark and listen! Preserve it
carefully, people, and thereby preserve yourselves. Free yourself from
this world and focus your longings on the next. Don't scorn those
elevated by piety, don't elevate those elevated by the world. Don't look
1 Qurʾan, Sabaʾ 34:13. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 438 Text and
Translation الدنيا ولا ت َ شيموا بارقها ولا تسمعوا ناطقها ولا تجيبوا
ناعقها ولا تستضيئوا بإشراقها ولا ت ُ فتنوا بأعلاقها فإنّ برقها خالب
ونطقها كاذب وأموالها محروبة وأعلاقها مسلوبة. دونَعلاو دونَكـلا دوحَجلاو نوؤَ
خلا ةنئاملاو نورَ حلا ةحماجلاو نونَعلا ةيّدصتملا يهو الأ الص اهُوْلُ عو لْزَه
اهّدِجو ّلذ اهّزعو لازلَز اهتأطوو ١لاقتنٱ اهلاح دويَ ملا دويَ حلاو دود َ ّ سُفْل
دار حرب وسلب ونهب وعطب أهلها على ساق وسياق ولَحاق وفراق قد تحـيّرت مذاهبها
وأعجزت مهاربها وخابت مطالبها فأسلمتهم المعاقل ولفظتهم المنازل وأعيتهم
المحاول فمن ناج ٍ معقور ولحم مجزور وشِلْوٍ مذبوح ودم مسفوح وعاض ّ ٍ على
يديه وصافق لـكفّيه ومرتفق بخدّيه وزارٍ على رأيه وراجع عن عزمه وقد أدبرت
الحيلة وأقبلت الغِيْلة ﴿وَلَات بهذو تاف ام تاف دق تاهيه تاهيه .﴾ٍصاَ نَم َنيِح َ
ما ذهب ومضت الدنيا ل َ ب اَ مَ ف﴿ اهِ لاب ِلاحِ كَت ِ هْيَ لَ ع ْ ضْرَأْلاَو ُءاَم َ
ّسلا ُم ُ اوُ ناَك اَمَو مُنظَرِينَ﴾. 1.190ومن خطبة له عليه السلام تسمّى القاصعة
وهي طويلة وفيها ذمّ إبليس والعصبيّة٢
1.190.1الحمدللهالذيلبسالعزّوالـكبرياءوٱختارهمالنفسهدونخلقهوجعلهماحِم ً ى
وحرمًا على غيره وٱصطفاهما لجلاله وجعل اللعنة على من نازعه فيهما من عباده.
ثمّ ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ: ⟩ٱفتعال⟨. ٢ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ش: ⟩ومن الناس من
يسمّي هذه الخطبة القاصعة وهي تتضمّن ذمّ إبليس على ٱستكباره وتر كه السجود
لآدمعليهالسلاموأنّهأوّلمنأظهرالعصبيّةوتبعالحميّةوتحذيرالناسمنسلوكطريقته⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
439
forherrainclouds,don'tattendherspeakers,don'tanswerhercallers,don'tseek
her glitter, don't fancy her jewels---for her flashes are empty, her
speech is false, her wealth will be plundered, and her jewels will be
looted. Hark! She is but a strumpet who will pull away, a bronco that
will bolt, a liar who will betray, a churl who is ungrateful, a deviator
who shuns, who strays. Her nature is to terminate, her step causes
earthquakes, her might is equal to shame, her seri- ousness is equal to
jest, and her elevation is equal to disgrace. She is an abode of plunder
and pillage, of loot and ruin. Her people are in torment, in agony, they
rush forward, they disperse, they are confused by her roads, enmeshed by
her evils, frustrated by her tricks. Their fortresses do not protect
them, their homes spit them out, and their ruses fail them.What are they
but hamstrung fugitives, butchered meat, slaughtered limbs, and spilt
blood! Some among them bite on their hands, strike with their palms,
lean cheeks on elbows in regret. Oth- ers among them are beset by doubt
and withdraw after resolve. But the time of scheming has passed, the
hour of calamity has come, «and it is too late to escape.»1 Far be it!
Far be it! What is lost is lost, what has gone has gone, and the world
has moved on with everything that it housed. «Then, neither the sky nor
the earth weeps over them, and they are not granted a reprieve.»2 1.190
From an oration by ʿAlī known as Qāṣiʿah---"The Crusher." It is a long
oration, containing censure of Iblīs,3 and of arrogance and tribal
factionalism.4 1.190.1 Praise God, who donned robes of might and pride,
reserving them for himself and allowing them to no other, who made them
a fortress and sanc- tuary that only he inhabits, selecting them for his
own majesty and cursing all who attempt to challenge him for them. Then
he tested his cherubim to see 1 Qurʾan, Ṣād 38:3. 2 Qurʾan, Dukhān
44:29. 3 Iblīs refers to Lucifer. 4 The oration was delivered in (a)
Kufa in 38/658 during the episode with Muʿāwiyah's envoy Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī
in Basra (see note at §2.29), with ʿAlī rebuking his followers,
particularly cer- tain individuals from the Tamīm and Azd tribes for
bickering among themselves when they had a common enemy to fight
(Thaqafī, Ghārāṭ, 2:394--396); or (b) sometime in the last few months of
ʿAlī's caliphate, after the Battle of Nahrawān when there was tribal
strife in Kufa,
condemnedintheoration(B736;Ḥ13:167--168,198).Thecontextof
internalquarrelingamong
ʿAlī'sfollowersisapossiblereasonforthenameassignedtotheoration:Qāṣiʿah,"TheCrusher,"
from: (1) qaṣaʿa l-qamlah, "he crushed the louse," i.e., the oration
crushed Satan and his sup- porters; (2) qaṣaʿat al-nāqah, "the camel
crushed its grain," referring to a camel chewing cud, because ʿAlī rode
out to the tribes and delivered this oration from the back of his camel;
or (3) qaṣaʿa l-māʾu ʿaṭashahu, "the water slaked his thirst," i.e., the
oration breaks the false pride of those who heed its teachings (B 736;
Ḥ13:128; F 354). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 440 Text and
Translation ٱختبر بذلك ملائكته المقرّبين ليميز المتواضعين منهم من
المستكبرين فقال سبحانه وهو العالم بم ُ ِ لاَخ يِّ ن ِإ﴿ بويغلا تابوجحمو
بولقلا تارَمض َ شَ ب ٌق ُ تْي َ ّوَس اَذِإَ ف ٍنيِط نِّم اًر هُ وَن َ فَخْت َ ف يِحو ُ
ّر نِمِهيِف ُ َ ف َنيِدِجاَسُ هَ ل اوُعَق سَجَدَ الْمَل َ ائ ِ َ مْجَأ ْمُهُ ّلُكُةَك سيِ لْب ِإ
ا َ ّل ِإ َنوُع َ ﴾ ٱعترضته الحميّة فٱفتخر على آدم بخلقه وتعص صعتملا مامإ
هللا ُ ّوُدَعف هلصأل هيلع ب ّ ّ بين وسلف المستكبرين الذي وضع أساس العصبيّة
ونازع الله رداء الجـبريّة وٱدّرع لباس التعزّز وخلع قِناع التذلّل ألا ترون كيف
صغّره الله بتكبّره ووضعه بترفّعه فجعله في الدنيا مدحورًا وأعدّ له في الآخرة
سعيرًا. ولو أراد سبحانه أن يخلق آدم من نور يَخْطَف بيطو هؤاوُر لوقعلا رهبَ يو
هؤايض راصبألا ٍ يأخذ الأنفاس عَرفه لفعل ولو فعل لظلّت له الأعناق خاضعة
ولخفّت البلوى فيه على الملائكة ولـكنّ الله سبحانه يبتلي خلقه .مهنم ءالَ يُ
خلل اًداعبإو مهنع رابكتسإلل اً يفنو مهل ١رايتخالاب اًزييمت هلصأ نولهجي ام
ضعبب فٱعتبروابماكانمنفعلاللهبإبليسإذاأحبطعملهالطويلوجهدهالجهيدوقدكان عَب
َ دَاللهستّةآلافسنةلايدرىأَمِنْ سِنِيالدنياأمسنيالآخرةعنكبرساعةواحدة فم َ
نبعدإبليسي َ ٍرمأباًرشبةّنجلالخديلهناحبسهللاناكاماَ ّ
لَكهتيصعملثمبهللاىلعمَلس أخرجبهمنهامَل َ كًاإنّ
حكمهفيأهلالسماءوأهلالأرضلواحدومابيناللهوبينأحد من خلقه هَوادة في إباحة حِم
ً ى حرّمه الله على العالمين. 1.190.2ب مكّزفتسي نأو هئادب مكيدعُ ي نأ هللا
٢ّودع اورذحٱف دقل يرمعلف هلْجَرو هليَ خ ِ ف َ قَ ّو بَر َلاَ ق﴿و بيرق ناكم نم
مكامرو ديدشلا عزنلاب مكـل قرغأو ديعولا مهس مكـل َ ِّ َ نِّيَزُأَل يِنَ تْيَوْغَأ اَ
مِب ُ هَ ل َ ّن ُ ه َ ّنَ يِوْغُأَلَو ِضْرَأْلا يِف ْم مْ أَجْم َ ّنظب اً مجرو ديعب بيغب
اً فذق﴾َنيِع غير مصيب صدّقه به أبناء الحميّة وإخوان العصبيّة وفرسان الـكبر
والجاهليّة. حتّى إذا ١م، ش: كذا. ن، ي، ھ، ومصحّحة في ش: ⟩بالاختبار⟨. ٢م، ي،
ومصحّحة في ش، ھ: كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩عباد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 441 who were humble and who arrogant. He said---while
knowing all that was concealed in their hearts and their hidden
secrets---«I shall create a human out of clay; when I have fashioned him
in good proportion and breathed into him my spirit, bow before him in
prostration. The angels prostrated, every one of them, except
Iblīs»1---his pride prevented him, and he claimed superiority
overAdam,citinghisloftiercreationandhigherorigin.Iblīs---God'senemy---is
leader of the bigots and forebear of the arrogant, the one who laid the
founda- tions of factionalism. He challenged God for his robe of
haughtiness, donned garments of self-glorification and cast off the veil
of humility. Do you not see how God diminished him because of his
arrogance and debased him because of his pride? He banished him in this
world and prepared for him a blazing fire in the hereafter! If the
Almighty had wished to create Adam from light whose radiance dazzled the
eye and whose brilliance stupefied the mind, and from fragrance whose
perfume filled the senses, he would have done so; and had he done so,
necks would have bowed to Adam in servility, and the trial of the angels
would have had little weight. But God tests his creation through things
whose reality they do not know, in order to differentiate them through
their choices, dispel their arrogance, and repulse their vanity. Learn a
lesson from God's punishment of Iblīs, whose long-standing worship and
painstak- ing efforts he obliterated for a single hour of pride! Iblīs
had worshipped God for six thousand years, either by the reckoning of
years in this world or by the unknown reckoning of the hereafter. Who,
then, is safe from God's retribution if he disobeys God as Iblīs did? No
one! God will never allow a human to enter the celestial garden if he
has committed a crime for which he evicted an angel. God's judgment
among the inhabitants of the heavens and the inhabitants of the earth is
one and the same. He will show no leniency in allowing anyone to enter a
fortress he has forbidden to all the worlds. 1.190.2 Beware lest Iblīs
infect you with his disease or intimidate you with his cavalry and
infantry.2 By my life, he has fitted the arrow of threat to his long-
bow, pulled the bowstring, aimed, and shot at you from close by. «He
said: My Lord, because you caused me to stray, I shall place temptations
before them on earth and lead them all astray.»3 His was a farfetched
idea and a wild supposi- tion, but zealotry's offspring, factionalism's
brothers, and men riding horses of pride and intolerance made his
aspiration come true. Then the hidden secret turned into an open affair,
when the recalcitrant among you became docile 1 Qurʾan, Ṣād 38:71--74. 2
Modified quote from Qurʾan, Isrāʾ 17:64. 3 Qurʾan, Ḥijr 15:39. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 442 Text and
Translation ٱنقادت له الجامحة منكم وٱست َ ّيفخلاّرسلا نم لاحلا تمجنف مكيف
هنم ةيعام َ ّطلا تمكح إلى الأمر الجليّ ٱستفحل سلطانه عليكم ودَل َ ف َ
بجنوده نحو كم فأقحمو كم وَلَجات الذلّ وأحلّو كم وَرَطات القتل وأوطؤو اً ّقَدو
مكقولح يف ا ً ّزَحو مكنويع يف اً نعط ةحارِجلا ناخثإ مك لمناخر ب اً قْوَسو
مكـلتاقمل اًدصقو مك ِ خ َ مكنيد يف مظعأ حبصأف مكـل ةّدَعُ ملا رانلا ىلإ
رهقلا مِئاَ ز اولعجٱف نيبّ لأتم مهيلعو نيبصانم مهل متحبصأ نيذلا نم اًحدق
مكايند يف ىروأو اًحْرَج عليه حدّكم وله جدّكم. فلعمر الله لقد فخر على أصلـكم
ووقع في حسبكم ودفع في نسبكم نانَب ّلكمكنمنوبرضيوناكم
ّلكبمكنوصنتقيمكـليبسهلْجَربدصقومكيلعهليَ خببلجأو لا تمتنعون بحيلة ولا
تدفعون بعزيمة في حَوْمة ذلّ وحَلْقة ضيق وعَرْصة موت وجَوْلة بلاء. فأطفئوا ما كَم َ
نَ في قلوبكم من نيران العصبيّة وأحقاد الجاهليّة وإنمّا تلك الحميّة تكون في
المسلم من خطرات الشيطان ونَخ َ َ نو هتاغَزَ نو هتاو فَثاته وٱعتمدوا وضع
التذلّل على رؤوسكم وإلقاء التعزّز تحت أقدامكم وخلع التكبّر من أعناقكم
وٱتّخذوا التواضع مَسل َ حة بينكم وبين عدوّكم إبليس وجنوده فإنّ له من كلّ أمّة
جنودًا وأعوانًا ورَجْل ً ا وفرسانًا.ولاتكونواكالمتكبّرعلىٱبنأمّهمنغيرِمافضلٍ
جعلهاللهفيهسوىماألحقت العظمة بنفسه من عداوة الحسد وقدحت الحميّة في قلبه
من نار الغضب ونفخ الشيطان في أنفه من ريح الـكبر الذي أعقبه الله به
الندامة وألزمه آثام القاتلين إلى يوم القيامة. 1.190.3ألا وقد أمعنتم في
البغي وأفسدتم في الأرض مُصارَحة لله بالمناصبة ومبارزة ناطيشلاخفانَمونآن َ
ّشلاحقالَمهّنإفةّيلهاجلارخفوةّيمحلاربكيفَ هللاَ هللافةبراحملابنينمؤملل
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
443 enough for him to lead, and his ambitions for you took firm hold.
His power over you grew oppressive and he marched against you with his
armies. They forced you into caverns of humiliation, hurled you into
chasms of carnage, and trampled you causing terrible wounds, thrusting
spears into your eyes, slashing your throats, smashing your noses,
slashing your organs, and dragging you by the nose-rings of subjugation
toward the Fire. Iblīs has maimed your religion and scorched your
worldly affairs far more effectively than the people you took as
adversaries and against whom you gathered your armies. Draw your swords
against him and double your efforts in his face! By my life, he has
boasted that his origin is better than yours, he has slandered your
ancestors, and tarnished your lineage. He has attacked you with his
cavalry and assaulted you with his infantry. They hunt you down wherever
you hide and slice off each of your fin- gers,1 while you cannot defend
yourself through any stratagem or push back with any act of resolve. You
are caught in the abyss of degradation, the nose- ring of compulsion,
the arena of death, and the circle of affliction. Extinguish the fires
of factionalism that lie concealed in your hearts and the resentments
that belong to the Age of Ignorance! Factionalist zeal in a Muslim comes
from Satan's incitements, from his goads, provocations, and
splutterings. Resolve to adorn your head with modesty, trample
self-glory beneath your feet, and cast the yoke of arrogance from your
necks. Make humility the garrison that stands between you and your
enemy, Iblīs, and his armies, for he has armies, infantry, cavalry, and
spies in all nations. Don't be like Cain, who thought himself bet- ter
than his brother, with no superior God-given virtue except the glory he
attributed to himself, generated by hate and envy, and the supercilious
zeal of his heart, kindled by the fire of anger!2 Satan breathed his own
pride into Cain's nose.3 Because of that pride, God bequeathed him
eternal remorse, and will hold him responsible for the crimes of all who
kill until the day of resurrection. 1.190.3 Hark! You have galloped on
the course of treachery and caused may- hem on earth, openly challenging
God and fighting his believers. Fear God, fear God! Stay away from the
arrogant bigotry and boasting that characterized the Age of Ignorance!
Those are rancor's pregnant camels and Satan's bellows! With them, he
duped past nations and bygone generations, making them race 1 Modified
quote from Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:12. 2 Lit. "Don't be like the one who ..."
The reference is to Adam's sons Cain (Ar. Qābīl) and Abel (Ar. Hābīl),
to Cain's killing of Abel at Iblīs's suggestion, and later, when it was
too late, feeling remorse. Qurʾan, Māʾidah 5:27--31; Ḥ13:145--146; B
747; F 358--359. 3 The nose symbolizes pride in Arab culture, in
addition to being the organ of breathing. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 444 Text
and Translation اللاتيخدعبهاالأممالماضيةوالقرونالخاليةحتّىأَعْن َ
قوافيحَنادِسجهالتهومهاوي ً لُ لُذ هتلالض ا عن سياقه سُل ُ سًا في قياده أمرًا
تشابهت القلوب فيه وتتابعت القرون عليه وكبرًا تضايقت الصدور به. ألا
فالحذرَالحذرَمن طاعة ساداتكم وكبرائكم الذين تكبّروا عن حسبهم وترفّعوا فوق
نسبهم وألقوا اله َ جينة على ربّهم وجاحدوا الله ما صنع بهم
فويسوةنتفلاناكرأمئاعدوةّيبصعلاساسآدعاوقمهّنإفهئالآلةبَ لاغموهئاضقلةرَ باكم
ٱعتزاء الجاهليّة. فٱتّقوا الله ولا تكونوا لنعمه عليكم أضدادًا ولا لفضله عند
كم حُسّادًا ولا تطيعوا الأدعياء الذين شربتم بصفو كم كَدَرَهم وخلطتم بصحّتكم
مرضهم وأدخلتم في حقّكم باطلهم وهم آساس الفسوق وأحلاس العقوق اتّخذهم إبليس
مَطايا ضلال يف اًلوخدو مكـلوقعل اً قارتسٱ مهتنسلأ ىلع قطني ةمجارتو سانلا
ىلع لوصي مهب اًدنجو عيونكم ون َ .هدي ذخأمو همدق ئطومو هلْبَن ىمْرَم مكـلعجف
مكعامسأ يف ١اً ثْف 1.190.4فٱعتبروا بما أصاب الأمم المستكبرين من قبلـكم من
بأس الله وصَولاته نم هللاب اوذيعتسٱو مهبونج عراصمو مهدودخ يواثمب اوظعّتٱو
هتالُ ثَمو هعئاقوو نم دحأل ربكـلا يف هللا صّخر ولف .رهدلا قراوط نم
هنوذيعتست امك ربكـلا حقاوَ ل عضاوتلا مهل يضرو ٢رباكتلا مهيلإَهَ ّرَكهناحبس
هّنكـلو هئايبنأ ةّصاخل هيف صّخرل هدابع فألصقوا بالأرض خدودهم وعَفَر ُ وا في
التراب وجوههم وخفضوا أجنحتهم للمؤمنين وكانوا أقوامًا مستضعفين. وقد
ٱختبرهم الله بالمَخْمَصة وٱبتلاهم بالمَجْهَدة وٱمتحنهم بالمخاوفومَخ َ
ضَهمبالمكارهفلاتعتبرواالرضاءوالسخطبالمالوالولدجهل ً ابمواقعالفتنة ِ مُ ناَ
مَ ّنَأَنوُ بَسْحَيَأ﴿هناحبسلاقدقف٣.راتقإلاوىنغلاعضاوميفرابتخالاو ِ بمُه ُ ّد ٍلا
َ ّمنِمِه ُ نَنيِ نَبَو ُ هَ لُعِراَس تاَرْيَ ـخْلا يِف ْم ِ ب َ لْ لَا ي َ شْعُر ُ وْنَ﴾فإنّ
الله سبحانه يختبر عباده المستكبرين ١م،ي،ونسخةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،ش،ھ،ونسخةفيي:
⟩نَثًا⟨. ٢ن،م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحة في ش: كذا. أصل ش، ومصحّحة في م: ⟩التكاثر⟨. ٣م، ي،
ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ن، ش، وأصلھ،ونسخةفيم: ⟩الافتقار⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 445 into the dark night of his ignorance and the abyss of
his error, docile under his direction and submissive under his reins. In
Satan's grip, hearts resembled one another as generation followed
generation. Pride ruled as breasts became straitened by its grip. Hark
and beware! Beware of obeying these chieftains and elders,1 who have
magnified themselves above their stature and aggrandized themselves
beyond their lineage, who have attributed vile deeds to their Lord and
challenged his actions, scorning his decree and impugning his
favors.They are pillars of factionalism, columns of sedition, and swords
of ancestor boasts from the Age of Ignorance. Be conscious of God. Do
not repulse his favors by acting in a contrary manner or repel his
generosity by your envy. Don't obey false claimants whose muddy slime
you have drunk instead of your pure water, whose diseases have infected
your sound health, and whose wrong you have mixed in with your right.
They are the foundations of vice, the constant com- panions of
rebellion. Iblīs owns them---steeds of error and an army with which he
assaults people.He hasappointedthemhisinterpreters.Speakingwiththeir
tongues, he weakens your minds, lends you his eyes, and whispers in your
ears. In this manner, he targets you with his arrows, tramples you under
his foot, and crushes you in his closed fist. 1.190.4 Learn lessons from
what arrogant nations before you faced: God's crushing blows, his sudden
attacks, his shocking onslaughts, and his exem- plary punishments.Take
counsel from knowing that their cheeks are now stuck inside the earth
and their torsos are struck onto the ground. Seek refuge in God from the
pregnant dangers of pride, just as you seek refuge in him from the
battering calamities of the age. If God had permitted any of his
servants pride, he would have permitted it to his select prophets, but
he disliked them to be proud and preferred them to be humble. They
placed their cheeks on the earth before him and pressed their faces to
the dirt. They lowered their wings for believers and were a group that
was widely scorned as weak.2 He tested them with hunger, afflicted them
with weariness, tried them with dangers, and ground them down with
adversities. People, do not weigh God's pleasure and displeasure in
terms of wealth and offspring, without knowing what tests and trials
inhere in positions of wealth or poverty! God has said, «Do they think
we supply them with wealth and sons in order to increase their comforts?
No indeed,theyhavenoidea!»3Godtestspeoplewhoaremightyintheirownview,
through his chosen ones, who are weak in their eyes. Moses, son of
Amram, 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Aḥzāb 33:67. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Ḥijr
15:88, Qaṣaṣ28:4. 3 Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:55--56. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 446 Text
and Translation في أنفسهم بأوليائه المستضعفين في أعينهم. ولقد دخل موسى
بن عمران ومعه أخوه هارون عليهما السلام على فرعون وعليهما مَدارِع الصوف
وبأيديهما العِصِيّ فشرطا له إنأسلم بقاءملـكه ودوامعزّهفقال ألاتعجبون
منهذينيشرطان ليدوام العزّوبقاء الملك وهما بما ترون من حال الفقر والذلّ
فهَلّا أُلقي عليهما أساورة من ذهب إعظامًا للذهب وجمعه وٱحتقارًا للصوف ولبسه
ولو أراد الله سبحانه بأنبيائه حيث بعثهم أن يفتحلهم كنوزالذِّهْبان
ومعادنالعِقيانومَغارِس الجِنان وأنيَحشر معهم طيرالسماء ووحوش الأرضين لفعل ولو
فعل لسقط البلاء وبطل الجزاء وٱضمحلّ الأنباء ولما وجب للقابلين أجور
المبتلين ولا ٱستحقّ المؤمنون ثواب المحسنين ولا لزمت الأسماءُ معانيَها.
ولـكنّ الله سبحانه جعل رسله أولي قوّة في عزائمهم وضَعَفَة فيما ترى الأعين من
حالاتهم مع قناعة تملأ القلوب والعيون غنى وخَصاصة تملأ الأبصار والأسماع ُ
ت ال ةّزعو مارُ ت ال ةّوق لهأ ءايبنألا تناك ولو .ىذأ َ مُ ت كْلُمو ماض دّ نحوه
أعناق الرجال وت ُ شَدّ
إليهعُقَدالرِّحاللكانذلكأهونعلىالخلقفيالاعتباروأبعدلهممنالاستكبار ولآمنوا عن
رهبة قاهرة لهم أو رغبة مائلة بهم وكانت النيّات مشترَكة والحسنات مقتسَمة.
ولـكنّ الله سبحانه أراد أن يكون الاتّباع لرسله والتصديق بكتبه والخشوع
لوجهه والاستكانة لأمره والاستسلام لطاعته أمورًا له خاصّة لا ي َ شُوبها من
غيرها شائبة وكلّما كانت البلوى والاختبار أعظم كانت المثوبة والجزاء أجزل.
1.190.5ألا ترون أنّ الله سبحانه ٱختبر الأوّلين مِن ل َ دُن آدم صل ّ ى الله
عليه إلى الآخرين من هذا العالم بأحجار لا تضرّ ولا تنفع ولا تبصر ولا تسمع
فجعلها بيته الحرام الذي جعله للناس قيامًا. ثمّوضعه بأوعر ب ِ اًرَدَم ايندلا
قئاتَن ّلقأو اً رجح ضرألا عاق وأضيق بطون الأودية ق ُ ةعطقنم ىرُ قو ةلِشَو
نويعو ةثِمَد لامِرو ةنِشَخ لابج نيب اً رْط al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 447 and with him his brother Aaron, were admitted to Pharaoh
wearing shifts of coarse wool and holding wooden staffs, and they
offered him a guarantee--- if he committed to God's will, his kingdom
would last forever, and his might would persist. Pharaoh exclaimed, "Do
you not wonder at these two? They promise me the continuation of my
might and the perpetuation of my king- dom when, as you see, they are
utterly poor and totally contemptible! How is it they are not adorned
with bracelets of gold?" Pharaoh prized gold and the hoarding of it and
mocked coarse wool and the wearing of it. If God, when he sent his
prophets, had wished to open for them treasuries of gold, stores of bul-
lion, and the granaries of the celestial garden, if he had wished to
assemble in their legions the birds of the air and the beasts of the
earth, he would have done so. And had he done so, the trial would have
been nullified, recompense would have become invalid, and true reports
would have dwindled. Those who accepted the prophets' message would not
have deserved the reward of those who had been tested, believers would
not have merited the reward of good deeds, and words would not have
retained their meanings. But God sent his messengers strong in
resolution, weak in terms of what eyes perceived. Their contentment
filled hearts and eyes with riches, while their destitution filled
eyesandearswithpain.If theseprophetshadpossessedstrengththatcouldnot be
challenged, might that could not be diminished, and kingship toward
which men's necks craned and saddles were fastened, these conditions
would have relieved the weight of reflection for the people and broken
their arrogance. People would have become believers either out of
subjugation to fear or the pull of desire. Intentions would have been
split and benefits would accordingly have been divided. But God willed
that all pious acts---devotion to his messen- gers, acceptance of the
truth of his books, self-effacement for his sake, humility before his
command, and submission to him and obedience---all these things should
be pure and for himself alone, untainted by any drop of insincerity. The
greater the test and trial, the grander the reward and recompense.
1.190.5 Do you not see? Starting with Adam, God tested all who came
before, up to the very last people in this world, with stones that
neither harm nor ben- efit nor see nor hear, shaping them into his
sacred house and designating it a place of worship for all humans. He
placed this House in the most rugged, most rocky region of the earth, in
the most barren place in the world, in the narrow- est, steepest cleft
of a valley, between rough mountains, tracts of porous sand, springs
with slow-trickling water, and scattered habitations, where no hoofed
animals---neither camels, nor mules, nor sheep---could feed or
thrive.Then he
commandedAdamandhischildrentoturntheirbodiestowardit,makingitthe place
to which they should return time after time to seek their journeys'
bene- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 448 Text and
Translation لا يزكو بها خُف هوحن مهفاطعأ اونثَ ي نأ هدلوو مدآ رمأ ّمث .فْلِظ
الو رفاح الو ّ زِوافَم نم ةدئفألا رامث هيلإ يوهت مهلاحر ىقْلُ مل ةياغو
مهرافسأ عَجتنُ مل ةباثَم راصف ً لُ لُذ مهبكانم اوّزهي ىّتح ةعطقنم راحب رئازجو
ةقيمع جاجِف يواهَمو ةقيحس رافِق ا يهلّون اوهّوشو مهروهظ ءارو ليبارسلا اوذبن
دق هل اًرْبُ غ اً ثْعُش مهمادقأ ىلع نولُمرَ يو هلوح هلل اًغيلباًصيحمتواً
نيبماًرابتخٱواًديدشاًناحتمٱواًميظعءالتبٱمهقلخنساحمروعشلاءافعإب هرعاشمو
مارحلا هتيب عضي نأ هناحبس دارأ ولو .هتّنج ىلإ ةلْصُوو هتمحرل اً ببس هللا
هلعج العظامبينجنّاتوأنهاروسهلوقرارجَمّالأشجاردانيالثمارمُلْت َ ف ىرُقلالصّتمىٰنُ
بلا ّ قرطو ةرضان عورزو ةقدغم صارِعو ةقِدحُم فايرأو ءارضخ ةضورو ءارمس ةّرُ ب
نيب عامرةلكانقدصغّرقدرالجزاءعلىحسبضعفالبلاء.ولوكانتالآساسالمحمول كلذ فّفخل
ءايضو رونو ءارمح ةتوقايو ءارضخ ةد ُ ّرُمُز ١نيب اهب عوفرملا راجحألاو اهيلع
َ لَ تْعُم ىفنلو بولقلا نع سيلبإ ةدَهاجُم عضولو رودصلا يف ّكشلا ةعَراضُم ج
الريب من الناس ولـكنّ الله يختبر عباده بأنواع الشدائد ويتعبّدهم بألوان
المجاهد ويبتليهم بضروب المكاره إخراجًا للتكبّر من قلوبهم وإسكانًا للتذلّل في
نفوسهم وليجعل ذلك ُ تُ ف اًباوبأ ً لُ لُذ اًبابسأو هلضف ىلإ اًح ا لعفوه. فالله
َالله َفي عاجل البغي وآجل وَخامة الظلم وسوء عاقبة الـكبر فإنّها مَصي َ دة
إبليس العظمى ومَكيدته الـكبرى التي ت ُ ساور قلوب
الرجالمُساورةالسمومالقاتلةفمات ُ كديأبدًاولات ُ يفاً ّلِقُمالوهملعلاً
ملاعالاًدحأيوش طِمْره.
1.190.6وعنذلكماحرساللهعبادهالمؤمنينبالصلواتوالزكواتومُجاهدةالصيام ً
ليلذتومهراصبألاًعيشختومهفارطألاً نيكستتاضورفملاماّيألايف النفوسهموتخفيضًا َ
ت نم كلذ يف امل مهنع ءالَ يُ خلل اًباهذإو مهبولقل عفير عَتائ ِ ق الوجوه
بالتراب تواضعًا وإلْصاق كرائم الجوارح بالأرض تصاغرًا ولحوق البطون بالمتون
من الصيام ١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيش: ⟩من⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 449 fit,1 and the final station where they should cast down
their saddles. Sincere hearts rush toward it,2 coming from remote,
waterless deserts, deep, hidden ravines, and isolated islands in the
sea. They come to it with their bodies shaking in awe, declaring God's
oneness as they circumambulate and quicken their feet, disheveled and
covered in dust, having cast off stitched clothing and tarnished the
comeliness of their form by foregoing shaving or cutting their hair.
This is truly a great trial, a harsh ordeal, a clear test---refinement
by fire. God has made it the means to obtain his mercy and the path to
reach his celestial garden. If he had placed his sacred house and sites
of ceremo- nial rites among gardens and rivers and valleys and plains
thick with trees and low-hanging fruits, densely packed with habitats,
flourishing with sun- ripened wheat and bright green flowerbeds, with
expansive pastures and well- watered plains, with freshly sprouted grain
and well-worn paths, all this would have decreased the value of the
reward, in keeping with the ease of the trial. Indeed, if the pillars
that support the sacred house and the slabs that raise it had been made
from green emerald and red ruby, from light and incan- descence, this
would have hindered doubt from entering into breasts, pre- vented
Satan's attacks on hearts, and blocked uncertainty's waves from crash-
ing down on people. No, indeed! God tests his servants with many kinds
of hardship, urges them to worship him through many types of privation,
and
afflictsthemwithmanydifferentsufferings,inordertoremovepridefromtheir
hearts and instill humility in their souls. These trials act as doors
that open wide toward his generosity, as docile mounts that carry their
riders toward his forgiveness. Fear God, people, fear God, and beware
the imminent penal- ties of treachery, the unwholesome end of
oppression, and the terrible out- come of pride! Pride is Iblīs's
greatest snare and his principal scheme. He infil- trates men's hearts
with its deadly poison. It is never ineffectual, and it misses no
one---not the learned man with his knowledge, nor the beggar with his
rags. 1.190.6 God has protected his believing servants from pride by
prescribing the ritual prayer, the alms-levy, and the hardship of
obligatory fasting on cer- tain days, in order to quieten their limbs,
lower their eyes, humble their souls, chasten their hearts, and repel
their conceit. These actions prompt them to smear their precious faces
with dust in self-effacement, prostrate their noble limbs upon the earth
in humility, and join belly to back through fasting in 1 Reference to
Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:125. 2 "Sincere hearts," Lit. "the fruit of hearts
(thimār al-afʾidah)." Reference to Qurʾan, Ibrāhīm 14:37. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 450 Text and
Translation تذلّل ً ا مع ما في الزكاة من صرف ثمرات الأرض وغير ذلك إلى أهل
المسكنة والفقر. .ربكـلا علاوط عدقو رخفلا مِجاوَ ن عْمَ ق نم لاعفألا هذه يف
ام ىلإ اورظنا 1.190.7ولقد نظرت فما وجدت أحدًا من العالمين يتعص ّ ب لشيء
من الأشياء إلّا عن عل ّ ريغ ءاهفسلا لوقعب طيلَ ت ةّجح وأ ءالهجلا هيومَ ت
لمتحت ة كم فإنّكم تتعص ّ بون لأمر لا يعرف له سبب ولا مس ّ يد عل ّ ة.١ أمّا
إبليس فتعص ّ ب على آدم لأصله وطعن عليه في خلقته فقال أنا ناري ٌّ وأنت
طينيّ وأمّا الأغنياء من مُتْرَفة الأمم فتعص ّ بوا ُ مِب ُنْحَن اَمَو اًداَلْوَأَو
اًلاَوْمَأُرَ ثْكَأ ُنْحَن﴿ اولاقف معنلا عقاوم راثآل ال ناك نإف .﴾َنيِ ب َ ّذَع بدّ من
العصبيّة فليكن تعص ّ بكم لمكارم الخصال ومحامد الأفعال ومحاسن الأمور التي
تفاضلت فيها المُج َ َ يو برعلا تاتويُ ب نم ءادَجُ ّنلاو ءاد عاسِيب القبائل
بالأخلاق الرغيبة والأحلامالعظيمةوالأخطارالجليلةوالآثارالمحمودةفتعص ّ
بوالخلالالحمدمنالحفظ
للجِواروالوفاءبالذِّمام٢والطاعةللبِرّوالمعصيةللـكبروالأخذبالفضلوالـكف ّ
عنالبغي والإعظام للقتل والإنصاف للخلق والـكظم للغيظ وٱجتناب الفساد في
الأرض. 1.190.8لامعألا ميمذو لاعفألا ءوسب تالُ ثَ ملا نم مكـلبق ممألاب لزن
ام اورذحٱو فتذ كّروا في الخـير والشرّ أحوالهم وٱحذروا أن تكونوا أمثالهم
فإذا تفكّرتم في ت َ فاوُت ةيفاعلا تّدَمو مهنع هل ءادعألا تحازو مهلاح هب
ةّزعلا تمزل رمأ ّلك اومزلٱف مهْيَ لاح َ ئيَ ف ه بهم وٱنقادت النعمة له معهم
ووصلت الـكرامة عليه حبلهم من الاجتناب للفرقة ضاحَ ّتلاو ةفلُألل موزللاو
نهوأو مهترقِف رسك رمأ ّلك اوبنتجٱو .اهب يصاوَ ّتلاو اهيلع ِ ّ مُنّتهم من
تضاغن القلوب وتشاحن الصدور وتدابر النفوس وتخاذل الأيدي. 1.190.9وتدبّروا
أحوال الماضين من المؤمنين قبلـكم كيف كانوا في حال التمحيص والبلاء ألم
يكونوا أثقل الخلائق أعباء وأجهد العباد بلاء وأضيق أهل الدنيا حالًا
١ن،ش،ھ:كذا.م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:سقطت ⟩مس ّ يد⟨.نسخةفيش: ⟩لاتُخشلهعل ّ ة⟨.
٢ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم،ونسخةفيش: ⟩الذمار⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 451 submission.Inaddition,thealms-levyprocuresthefruitsof
theearthandother commodities for the poor and destitute. See how these
actions blast people's nascent shoots of self-importance and wither
their budding sprouts of pride! 1.190.7 I looked around and found no one
anywhere---other than you---who displays zealotry without a reason, any
reason, that could possibly prompt the ignorant to confusion, or an
argument, any argument, that could poten- tially appeal to the minds of
the foolish. You show prejudice toward a matter whose reason is unknown,
that is untouched by any hand of purpose. Iblīs felt himself superior to
Adam because of his origin, and he defamed Adam's mode of creation when
he said, "My origin is fire, while yours is clay." Scions of wealthy
nations who were given enormous riches felt themselves superior because
they had become used to luxury, and they said, «We have more wealth and
more children; we shall never have to endure suffering.»1 If you must
feel superior, then save your pride for the noble qualities,
praiseworthy acts, and beautiful deeds that the honorable and courageous
Arabian clans and tribal chieftains strived for through their
cultivation of desirable traits, great minds, kingly thoughts, and
praiseworthy deeds.2 Their zeal was for traits that earn
praise---protection of neighbors, fulfillment of pledges, obeying good,
desist- ing from pride, embrace of virtue, refraining from treachery,
deeming killing to be a grave affair, dispensing of justice to all,
suppression of anger, and absten- tion from wreaking havoc on earth.
1.190.8 Beware of exemplary punishments that befell earlier nations
because of their evil acts and hateful deeds. Recall their conditions,
the good and then the bad, and beware of becoming like them. Think about
the change in their states. Hold fast to everything that gave them
might, scattered their enemies, spread wellbeing among them, attracted
beneficence to them, and bolstered the bonds of generosity---avoidance
of division, holding fast to friendship, pro- moting harmony, and
counselling one another to unite. Refrain from every- thing that broke
their spine and weakened their strength---malice in the heart, rancor in
the breast, turning one's back, and withholding one's hand. 1.190.9
Reflect on the condition of past believers. Think about how they lived
through states of trial and testing. Were they not the most burdened of
crea- tures, the most tested of God's servants, the most straitened
among the world's 1 Qurʾan, Sabaʾ 34:35. 2 "Chieftains," lit. "queen
bees" (yaʿāsīb, sing. yaʿsūb). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 452 Text and
Translation لاحلا حربت ملف رارُ ملا عَرُج مهوعّرجو باذعلا ١ءوس مهوماسف اًديبع
ةنعارفلا مهتذخّتٱ بهم في ذلّ الهلـكة وقهر الغلبة لا يجدون حيلة في ٱمتناع
ولا سبيل ً ا إلى دفاع. حتّى إذا رأى الله جِدّ الصبر منهم على الأذى في محبّته
والاحتمال للمكروه من خوفه جعل لهم من مضايق البلاء فرجًا فأبدلهم العزّ مكان
الذلّ والأمن مكان الخوف فصاروا ملوكًا حُكّامًا وأئمّة أعلامًا وبلغت الـكرامة من
الله لهم ما لم تذهب الآمال إليه بهم. فٱنظروا كيف كانوا حيث كانت الأَملاء
مجتمعة والأهواء مؤتلفة والقلوب معتدلة والأيدي مترادفة والسيوف متناصرة
والبصائر نافذة والعزائم واحدة ألم يكونوا أربابًا في أقطار الأرضين وملوكًا
على رقاب العالمين فٱنظروا إلى ما صاروا إليه في آخر أمورهم حين وقعت
الفُرقة وتشتّتت الألفة وٱختلفت الكلمة والأفئدة وتشعّبوا مختلفين
وتفرّقوامتحاربين.٢قدخلعاللهعنهملباسكرامتهوسلبهمغضارةنعمتهوب َ قّىق َ صص
أخبارهم فيكم عبرًا للمعتبرين منكم. 1.190.10فٱعتبروا بحال ولد إسماعيل وبني
إسحاق وبني إسرائيل عليهم السلام فما أشدّ ٱعتدال الأحوال وأقرب ٱشتباه
الأمثال. تأمّلوا أمرهم في حال تشتّتهم وتفرّقهم ليالي كانت الأكاسرة
والقياصرة أربابًا لهم يحتازونهم عن رِيْف الآفاق وبحر العراق وخضرة الدنيا
إلى منابت الشيح ومَهافي الريح ون َ كَد المعاش فتركوهم عالة مساكين نومصتعي
ةوعد حانج ىلإ نووأي ال اًرارق مهبدجأو اًراد ممألا ّلذأ ٣رَ بَوو رَ بَد ناوخإ
بهاولا إلىظلّ ألفةيعتمدونعلى عزّها.فالأحوالمضطربة والأيدي مختلفةوالـكثرة
متفرّقةفيبلاءِأَزْلٍ وأطباقجهلمنبناتمَوْؤُوْدةوأصناممعبودةوأرحاممقطوعة وغارات
مشنونة. فٱنظروا إلى مواقع نعم الله عليهم حين بعث إليهم رسولًا فعقد بملّته
طاعتهم وجمع على دعوته ألفتهم كيف نشرت النعمة عليهم جناح كرامتها وأسالت
لهم ١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩سوم⟨. ٢م،ي،ھ:كذا.ن،ش: ⟩متحازبين⟨. ٣ن،ش،ھ:كذا.
م،ومصحّحةفيھ: ⟩دَينووتر⟨.ي: ⟩دبرووتر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 453 people? Various pharaohs enslaved them, inflicted on
them the vilest of tor- tures, and forced them to drink from the
bitterest of cups. Their condition continued thus in servile desperation
and forceful subjugation with no means to repel and no way to defend,
until God, seeing them endure suffering, out of
theirloveforhim,seeingthemaccepthardship,outof theirfearof him,showed
them a way out of the narrow straits of trial, giving them might in
exchange for humiliation, security instead of fear. They became kings
who ruled and lead- ers with great fame. They received gifts from God
beyond their furthest hopes. Think!What was their state when factions
were united, desires were in concert, hearts were balanced, hands were
used to help, swords were drawn in assis- tance, perceptions were acute,
and resolutions were one? Did they not become lords of all the realms,
kings ruling over the necks of all peoples of the world? Again, think!
How did their state change near the end, when division befell them,
friendships shattered, words and hearts moved apart, when they split
into opposing factions and separated into warring groups? God stripped
them of his enveloping generosity and plundered them of his fresh
bounty. Yes, and he ensured that their tales stayed alive among you as a
lesson for all who would heed. 1.190.10 Take a lesson from the condition
of the sons of Ishmael, the children of Isaac, and the children of
Israel. How strongly their states harmonize, how closely their examples
match! Think of their state during their time of division and
disunity.Those were the nights in which the kings of Persia and the
emper- ors of Byzantium were their overlords. They drove them out of
their pasture- lands from the river valleys of Iraq and the world's
abundance of green herbage into tracts where bitter wormwood grew, where
hot winds blew, and life was harsh. They left them poor and abject,
camel-herders tending to their beasts' sores and harvesting their wool.
They lived as the most wretched of nations, with the least fertile
fields, with no mission under whose wing they could seek shelter, no
column of unity on whose strength they could depend. Their situation was
volatile, their hands discordant, their numbers scattered. They were
trapped in a hard trial and crushed under rocks of ignorance: they
buried baby girls alive,1 worshipped idols, cut ties of kinship, and
raided one another. Observe the abundance of God's blessings on them. He
sent them a messen- ger, secured their obedience through his religion,
and gathered their company within his mission. See how bounty spread the
wings of her generosity over 1
ReferencetoQurʾan,Takwīr81:8.Onfemaleinfanticideinpre-IslamicArabia,seeḤ13:174--177;
F 362--364; B 766--768. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 454 Text and
Translation جداولنعيمهاوٱلتفّتالمل ّ
ةبهمفيعوائدبركتهافأصبحوافينعمتهاغَرِقينوعنخضرة عيشها ف َ كِهين قد تربّعت
الأمور بهم في ظلّ سلطان قاهر وآوَتْهم الحال إلى كنف عزّ غالب وتعطّفت الأمور
عليهم في ذُرى مُلْك ثابت فهم حُكّام على العالمين وملوك في نميف ماكحألا نوضمُ
يو مهيلع اهكـلمي ناك نم ىلع رومألا نوكـلمي نيضرألا فارطأ ُ ت الو ةانَ ق
مهل زَمغُ ت ال مهيف اهيضمي ناك قر َ ع لهم صَفاة. 1.190.11مكيلع بورضملا هللا
نصح متمَ لَ ثو ةعاطلا لبح نم مكيديأ متضفن دق مكّنإو الأ بأحكام الجاهليّة وإنّ
الله سبحانه قد ٱمْت َ نّ على جماعة هذه الأمّة فيما عقد بينهم من حبل هذه
الأُلفة التي يتنقّلون في ظلّها ويأوون إلى كنفها بنعمة لا يعرف أحد من
المخلوقين لها قيمة لأنّها أرجح من كلّ ثمن وأجلّ من كلّ خطر. وٱعلموا أنّكم
صرتم بعد الهجرة أعرابًا وبعد الموالاة أحزابًا ما تتعلّقون من الإسلام إلّا
بٱسمه ولا تعرفون من الإيمان إلّا رسمه تقولون النار ولا العار وكأنّكم
تريدون أن ت ُ كفِئوا الإسلام على وجهه نإمّكنإوهقلخنيباً
نمأوهضرأيفاًمرحمكـلهللاهعضويذلاهقاثيملاًضقنوهميرحلاًكاهتنٱ لجأتم إلى غيره
حاربكم أهل الـكفر ثمّلا جبريلَ ولا ميكائيلَ ولا مهاجرين ولا أنصار دنع ّنإو
مكنيب هللا مكحي ىّتح فيسلاب ةعَراقُ ملا اّلإ مكنورصني كم الأمثال من بأس الله
وقوارعه وأيّامه ووقائعه فلا تستبطئوا وعيده جهل ً ا بأخذه وتهاونًا ببطشه١
ويأسًا من بأسهفإنّ
اللهسبحانهلميلعنالقرنالماضيبينأيديكمإلّالتركهمالأمربالمعروفوالنهي عن
المنكر فلعن السفهاء لركوب المعاصي والحلماء لترك التناهي. ألا وقد قطعتم
قيد ١ن،م،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ي،وأصلش: ⟩ببسطه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 455 them and the wellspringsof her delightsflowed. See
howthe new religiongath- ered them within the gifts of its grace.They
were immersed in its bounty, joyful in the fresh greenness of its way of
life. Their affairs reposed comfortably in the shade of powerful
authority, events brought them under the aegis of vic- torious might,
and affairs looked kindly upon them, as they lived in ease in the
protection of an established empire. They became rulers of the world and
kings over the far reaches of the earth, controlling the affairs of
those who had controlled theirs, and issuing commands to those who had
commanded them. ⟨Their spear became hard, their rock uncrushable.⟩1
1.190.11 Hark! Your hands have loosed the rope of allegiance and
breached God's fortress by indulging in judgments from the Age of
Ignorance.This, when God has blessed this congregation by binding them
with bonds of affection, so they can move in its shade and take refuge
in its shelter! No one can fathom the value of this favor; it exceeds
any price and is grander than any eminence. Know this: After your
migration to Muḥammad's city, you have reverted to liv- ing as rough
Bedouins,2 after loyal unison, you have again split into factions. You
own nothing of Islam except its name, you recognize nothing of belief
except its ritual. You say, "Flames rather than shame!" as though you
wished to knock Islam over on its face, rending its holiness, and
breaking the covenant bywhich God
gaveyouasanctuaryuponhisearthandasourceof safetyamong the earth's
people. If you seek any other refuge, unbelievers will wage war against
you, and neither Gabriel nor Michael, neither Immigrants nor Allies,
will come to your aid.3 You will see only the clashing of swords until
God rules between you once and for all. You have witnessed examples of
God's might, of his blows, battle-days, and onslaughts. Do not ignore
his chastisement, under- estimate his assault, and undervalue his force,
do not think his retribution will be slow in coming! God damned the
generation just before you because they ceased to command good and
forbid evil. He damned the immature because they mounted the steeds of
sin and the mature because they ceased to forbid. 1 Arabic idioms. Lit.
⟨Their spear could never be squeezed (lā tughmaz), and their rock could
never be crushed (lā tuqraʿ)⟩. For references in poetry re "squeezing"
(ghamz) of a spear, see Ibn Manẓūr, Lisān, s.v. "Gh-M-Z." ⟨Their rock
cannot be crushed⟩(lā tuqraʿu lahum ṣafāh) is attributed to the Prophet
in Nuwayrī, Nihāyah, s.v. "Ṣ-F-W." 2 Re the migration (hijrah), I have
added the words "to Muḥammad's city" for clarity. Re Bedouins (aʿrāb),
the line signifies that "after having accepted the refinements of Islam,
you have reverted to the factional ways of pre-Islamic Arabians." B 768;
Ḥ13:18. Bedouins are chas- tised for hypocrisy in the Qurʾan, Tawbah
9:97, 99. 3 Gabriel and Michael are two archangels. Immigrants
(Muhājirūn) are those who migrated to Muḥammad in Medina, and Allies
(Anṣār) are the Medinans who supported him. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 456 Text
and Translation ثكنلاو يغبلا لهأ لاتقب هللا ينرمأ دقو الأ .هماكحأ مُ
ّتَمَأو هدودح متلّطعو مالسإلا
والفسادفيالأرضفأمّاالناكثونفقدقاتلتوأمّاالقاسطونفقدجاهدتوأمّاالمارقة
تعمسةقعصبهتيفُكدقفةهْدَ ّرلاناطيشاّمأوتخّوددقف ُ لهاوَجْبةقلبهورَجّةصدره وبقي
بقيّة من أهل البغي ولئن أذن الله في الـكرّة عليهم لأُديلنّ منهم إلّا ما يتشذّر
في أطراف الأرض تشذّرًا. 1.190.12أنا وضعت بكلكل العرب وكسرت نواجم قرون
ربيعة ومضر وقد علمتم موضعي من رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بالقرابة
القريبة والمنزلة الخصيصة. وضعني في حَجْره وأنا وليد يضمّني إلى صدره ويكنفني
في فراشه ويمسّني جسده وي ُ شمّني عَرْفه نرق دقلو لعف يف ةلْطَخ الو لوق يف ةبْذَك
يل دجو امو هينمقلُ يّمث ءيشلا غضمي ناكو الله به صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله من
لدن كان فطيمًا أعظم ملك من ملائكته يسلك به طريق عفري هّمأ رَ ثَأ ليصفلا
عابّتٱ هعبتأ تنك دقلو هراهنو هليل ملاعلا قالخأ نساحمو مراكملا بةنس
ّلكيفرواجيناكدقلوهبءادتقالابينرمأيوهقالخأنماً ملعموي ّلكيفيل ِ حِراء
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
457 Hark!Youhavecutoff Islam'srestrictions,strippedoff
itsconstraints,andkilled off its commands. Hark! God has commanded me to
fight those who commit treachery, break their pledge, and cause mayhem
on earth: I have fought those
whobroketheirpledge,battledthosewhoactedwrongfully,andsubduedthose who
left the faith.1 The Satan of the Stony Hollow was taken out by a
thunder- boltthatmadehisheartscreamandhisbreastquake.2Asmallnumberof
rebels remain: If God permits another attack, I shall most certainly
prevail, except for the handful that escape, who will scatter to the
corners of the realm. 1.190.12 It was I who felled the trunk of the
Arabs and crushed the horns of Rabīʿah and Muḍar.3 Besides, you all know
my relationship with God's Mes- senger, our close kinship and special
intimacy.4 He took me to his bosom as a newborn, clasping me to his
breast and covering me with his bedspread, his body touching mine and I
inhaling his fragrance; he would chew a piece of food to soften it then
place it in my mouth. He never found falseness in my words or foulnessin
myactions.Eversince theMessenger'sowninfancy,Godhadplaced his greatest
angel to guide him day and night on the path of virtue and the most
beautiful traits. I would follow him as a camel calf follows its mother,
and each dayhewouldraiseinfrontof
meabannerdisplayinghisvirtuouscharacterand
commandmetoemulate.EveryyearhewouldretreattoMountḤirāʾforprayer,
wherenoonebutIsawhim.Inthosedays,notonehomehousedanysupporters 1 The
pledge-breakers (nākithūn) are said to be ʿAlī's opponents at the Battle
of the Camel, the wrongdoers (qāsiṭūn) are Muʿāwiyah and his Syrian
supporters, and those who left the faith (māriqūn) are the Kharijites,
the three groups that ʿAlī fought in the Battles of the Camel, Ṣiffīn,
and Nahrawān. Muḥammad's hadith, whose terminology ʿAlī echoes in his
oration, is reported as, ⟨You \[O ʿAlī\] will battle the
pledge-breakers, the wrongdoers, and the faith- leavers after me⟩.
Ḥ13:183--184; B 771--772; F 364--365. 2 The Satan of the Stony Hollow
(shayṭān al-rad'hah) is a man known as Dhū al-Thudayyah, "The Man with
the Breast," called thus because of a mass of flesh on his shoulder, a
Kharijite whose death at Nahrawān ʿAlī said the Prophet had told him
would signal his own immi- nent martyrdom. ʿAlī personally sought out
Dhū al-Thudayyah's corpse among the dead at Nahrawān, and when he saw
it, he exclaimed, "God is great! I have never lied, nor has \[the
Prophet\] lied to me." Ḥ13:183--184; B 771--772; F 364--365. 3 Refers to
ʿAlī's slaying of famous pre-Islamic Arabian warriors in single combat
during the early Muslims' battles, when he was only around twenty years
of age, thereby playing a major role in Islam's military and political
ascendancy. Muḍar is the eponymous ancestor of the Prophet's own tribe
of Meccan Quraysh, who formed the largest bloc of his enemies, and ʿAlī
slew several of their leaders in the Muslims' early battles. The Rabīʿah
tribe was divided among ʿAlī and his opponents during the Battles of the
Camel and Ṣiffīn, and ʿAlī slew several of their leaders who fought
against him then. B 772; Ḥ13:198. 4 Muḥammad had taken the infant ʿAlī
as his ward, and ʿAlī grew up in Muḥammad's care. Details in
Ḥ13:198--212; B 772--776. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 458 Text and
Translation فأراه ولا يراه غيري ولم يجمع بيت واحد يومئذ في الإسلام غير
رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليهوآلهوخديجة وأناثالثهماأرىنور الوحيوالرسالةوأشمّ
ريحالنبوّة.ولقدسمعترنّة الشيطان حين نزل الوحي عليه صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
فقلت يا رسول الله ما هذه الرنّة فقال هذا الشيطان قد أيس من عبادته إنّك
تسمع ما أسمع وترى ما أرى إلّا أنّك لست بنبيّ وإنّك لوزير وإنّك لعلى خير. ولقد
كنت معه صل ّ دق كّنإ دّمحم اي هل اولاقف شيرق نم ألملا هاتأ اّ مل هلآو هيلع
هللا ى ٱدّعيت عظيمًا لم ي َ هيلإ انتبجأ نإ اًرمأ كلأسن نحنو كتيب نم دحأ الو
كؤابآ هِع َ ّد وأريتناه علمنا أنّك نبيّ ورسول وإن لم تفعل علمنا أنّك ساحر
كذّاب فقال لهم صل ّ ى الله عليه وما تسألون قالوا تدعو لنا هذه الشجرة حتّى
تنقلع بعروقها وتقف بين يديك فقال صل ّ َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ﴿ هلآو هيلع هللا
ى ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌ﴾فإن فعل الله ذلك لـكم أتؤمنون وتشهدون بالحقّ قالوا
نعم قال فإن ّ ي سأريكم ما تطلبون وإن ّ ي لأعلم أنّكم لا ت َ فيئون إلى خير
وأنّ فيكم من ي ُ طر َ ح في القليب ومن يُحزِّب الأحزاب. ثمّقال يا أيّتها الشجرة
إن كنت تؤمنين بالله واليوم الآخر وتعلمين أن ّ ي رسول الله فٱنقلعي بعروقك
حتّى تقفي بين يدي ّ بإذن الله. فوالذي بعثه بالحقّ لٱنقلعت بعروقها وجاءت
ولها دَوي ّ شديد وقصف كقصف أجنحة الطير حتّى وقفت بين يدي رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله مرفرفة وألقت بغصنها الأعلى على رسول الله وببعض أغصانها
على مَنكِبي وكنت ُ مف اًرابكتسٱو اً ّولع اولاق كلذ ىلإ موقلا رظن اّملف مالسلا
هيلع هنيمي نع رْها فليأتك نصفُها al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
459 of Islam, it was just the Messenger and Khadījah, and I was the
third. Through- out, I saw the light of revelation and messengerhood,
and inhaled the fragrance of prophecy. I heard Satan's cry when
revelation descended on the Messenger, and when I asked, "What is this
cry?" he answered me, ⟨This is Satan, who now despairs of being
worshipped. You see what I see and hear what I hear, ʿAlī, though you
are not a prophet, but my vizier, and on the path of virtue.⟩ I was with
the Messenger when a group of the Quraysh came to him and said,
"Muḥammad, you have made a grand claim, one that none of your fore-
bears or any of your house has ever made. We want to ask you to do
something: If you are able to do it, if you are able to show it to us,
we will be convinced that you are indeed a prophet and a messenger, but
if you don't, then we will know that you are a magician and a liar." The
Messenger responded, "What do you seek?" They answered, "Ask this tree
to pull up its roots and come forward to stand before you."1 The
Messenger exclaimed, "«Truly, God is powerful over all things.»2 If God
does this for you, will you believe and testify to the truth?" They
replied with one voice, "Yes, we will." The Messenger said to them, "All
right, I will show you what you demand, although I know that you will
not turn to virtue. I know that there are among you men who will be cast
into the Well, and others who will convene the fated Confederacy."3Then
he intoned, "O tree, if you believe in God and the last day, if you know
that I am God's messen- ger, then, with God's permission, pull up your
roots and come stand in front of me!" I swear by the one who sent
Muḥammad with the truth that the tree pulled up its roots and came
forward with a loud rumble and a fluttering like the fluttering of
birds' wings. Boughs rustling, it came to stand before the Mes- senger
and let its highest branches fall over him. Some branches brushed my
shoulders---I was standing to his right. When the men from Quraysh saw
this, they demanded with pride and arrogance, "Now command half of it to
come to you,while the otherhalf
staysinitsplace."TheMessengercommandedthetree to do this. Half of it
came forward most wondrously and with an even louder 1 Recounts the
Miracle of the Tree that Muslims believe Muḥammad performed in Mecca. B
776; Ḥ13:214. 2 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:20, 109, 148, Āl ʿImrān 3:165, Naḥl
16:77, Nūr 24:45, ʿAnkabūt 29:20, Fāṭir 35:1. 3 "Persons cast into the
Well" is a prophecy about those of the Quraysh who would be killed
fighting against Muḥammad at the Battle of Badr in 2/624 and were thrown
into its wells, including ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams, Shaybah ibn
Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams, Umayyah ibn ʿAbd Shams, Abū Jahl (ʿAmr ibn
Hishām ibn al-Mughīrah), and Walīd ibn al-Mughīrah. "Others who will
convene the fated Confederacy" is a prophecy about those of the Quraysh
who would spearhead the Battle of the Confederates in 5/627, including
Abū Sufyān Ṣakhr ibn Ḥarb ibn Umayyah, ʿAmr ibn ʿAbdWadd, Ṣafwān ibn
Umayyah, ʿIkrimah ibn Abī Jahl, and Suhayl ibn ʿAmr. B 776; Ḥ13:214; F
365. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 460 Text and
Translation فتلتتداكفاً
ّيودهّدشأولابقإبجعأكاهفصنهيلإلبقأفكلذباهرمأفاهفصنىقبيو ّ برسول الله صل ّ
ُ مف اً ّوتُعو اً رفك اولاقف هلآو هيلع هللا ى رْهذا النصف فليرجع إلى نصفهكما
كانفأمرهعليهالسلامفرجعفقلتأنا ⟩لاإل ٰ هإلّاالله⟨إن ّ يأوّلمؤمنبكيارسولالله
وأوّل من آمن بأنّ الشجرة فعلت ما فعلت بأمر الله تصديقًا لنبوّتك وإجلالًا
لكلمتك فقال القوم كلّهم بل ساحر كذّاب عجيب السحر خفيف فيه وهل يصدّقك في
أمرك إلّا مثل هذا يعنونني. وإن ّ صلا اميس مهاميس مئال ةموَ ل هللا يف
مهذخأت ال موق نمل ي ِّدّيقين وكلامهم كلام الأبرار عُمّار الليل ومنار النهار
متمسّكون بحبل١ القرآن يحيون سُنن الله وسنن رسوله لا يستكبرون ولا يعلون٢
ولا ي َ غُلّون ولا يفسدون قلوبهم في الجنان وأجسادهم في العمل. 1.191ً لجر
ناك ماّمَه هل لاقي هل اً بحاص ّنأ يور .مالسلا هيلع هل ةبطخ نمو ا عابدًا فقال
له يا أميرالمؤمنينصفليالمتّقينكأن ّ
يأنظرإليهمفتثاقلعنجوابهثمّقالياهمّامٱتّقاللهوأحسن ُ نِسْحُم ْمُه َنيِذَ ّ لاَو اوَقَ
ّتٱ َنيِذَ ّ لا َعَمَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ﴿ـف ونَ﴾فلم يقنع همّام بذلك القول حتّى عزم
عليه قال فحمد الله وأثنى عليه وصل ّ ى على النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
ثمّقال هّنأل مهتيصعمب اً نمآ مهتعاط نع اً ّينغ مهقلخ نيح قلخلا قلخ هناحبس
هللا ّنإف .دعب اّمأ لا تضرّه معصية من عصاه ولا تنفعه طاعة من أطاعه. فقسم
بينهم معايشهم ووضعهم من الدنيا مواضعهم. ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ:أضيفت
⟩الله⟨. ٢م،ي،ھ:كذا.ش،ن: ⟩يغلون⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
461 rumble, and it almost wrapped itself around the Messenger. The group
then cried out in rejection and insolence, "Command this half to go back
to its other half as it was." The Messenger did so, and the tree went
back. I spontaneously exclaimed, "⟨There is no god but God!⟩I am the
first to profess belief in you, O Messenger of God, the first to profess
belief that the tree did what it did by God's command to prove the truth
of your prophethood, the first to offer obei- sance to your word!" That
group, however, every one of them, sneered, "No, you are a magician and
a liar! Your magic is quite something, and you are good at it. Only
someone like this nobody---meaning me---would believe you to be a
prophet." People, I belong to a group who care not if they are
criticized when their actions are for the sake of God! Our mark is the
mark of those who uphold the truth of God's word, our speech is the
speech of the virtuous. We inhabit the night with prayer, we are beacons
of light during the day.We hold fast to the Qurʾan, keeping alive God's
ways and the practices of his Messenger. We never behave with arrogance,
never conduct ourselves with conceit, never cheat, are never corrupt.
Our hearts are in paradise, while our bodies are occupied here with
doing good. 1.191 FromanorationbyʿAlī:Itisreportedthatoneof
ʿAlī'scompanions,amannamed Hammām, who was devoted to worship, said to
him, "Commander of the Faithful, describe to me the pious, such that I
see them before my eyes!" ʿAlī hesitated, then answered, "Hammām, be
pious and do good, for «God is with those who are pious and do good.»"1
Hammām was not satisfied with this brief answer and persisted. The
narrator continues that ʿAlī then thanked God, praised him, invoked
blessings on the Prophet, and delivered the following oration:2 When God
created people, he created them not needing their obedience, and
untouched by their disobedience.The disobedience of those who disobey
does not harm him, and the obedience of those who obey does not benefit
him. He distributed sustenance among them and gave them various stations
in this life. 1 Qurʾan, Naḥl 16:128. 2 Presumably in Kufa, during ʿAlī's
caliphate 35--40/656--661, based on the context given by Ibn Ṭalḥah
(Maṭālib, 269), in which a few individuals approached ʿAlī asking for a
favor, pre- sumably money; they would have been more likely to petition
ʿAlī when he, as caliph, was in charge of the treasury. Ibn Ṭalḥah
further narrates that they identified themselves as his followers, to
which ʿAlī replied, "I don't see any signs of my true followers in you."
At this time, Hammām asked ʿAlī to explain the signs of his true
followers (shīʿah, rather than "the pious, muttaqūn," as per the present
volume), and ʿAlī responded with the oration at hand. On this text, see
Qutbuddin, "Piety and Virtue in Early Islam: Two Sermons by Imam Ali,"
and Qut- buddin, "Classical Islamic Oration's Art, Function, and
Life-Altering Power of Persuasion:The Ultimate Response by Hammam to
Ali's Sermon on Piety, and by Hurr to Husayn's Battle Ora- tion in
Karbala." Hammām (d. ca. 36/656), according to the commentators, is
Hammām ibn Shurayḥibn Yazīd (Ḥ10:134), or Hammām ibn ʿUbādah ibn
Khuthaym (B 599). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 462 Text and
Translation فالمتّقون فيها هم أهل الفضائل منطقهم الصواب وملبسهم الاقتصاد
ومشيهم التواضع غضّوا أبصارهم عمّا حرّم الله عليهم ووقفوا أسماعهم على العلم
النافع لهم نزلت أنفسهم منهم في البلاء كالذي نزلت في الرخاء لولا الأجل
الذي كتب الله لهم لم مظع باقعلا نم اً فوخو باوثلا ىلإ اً قوش نيع ةفرط
مهداسجأ يف مهحاورأّرقتست نوم َ ّعنم اهيف مهف اهآر دق نمكةّنجلاو مهف
.مهنيعأ يف هنود ام رغصف مهسفنأ يف قلاخلا
وهموالناركمنقدرآهافهمفيهامعذّبونقلوبهممحزونةوشرورهممأمونةوأجسادهم
نحيفةوحاجتهمخفيفةوأنفسهمعفيفةصبرواأيّامًاقصيرةأعقبتهمراحةطويلةتجارة مربحة
يس ّ رها لهم ربّهم أرادتهم الدنيا ولم يريدوها وأسرتهم ففدوا أنفسهم منها.
ً ليترت اهنولّتري نآرقلا ءازجأل نوُ لات مهمادقأ نوّفاصف ليللا اّمأ ا يحزّنون
به أنفسهم ويستثيرون به دواء دائهم فإذا مرّوا بآية فيها تشويق ركنوا إليها
طمعًا وتطلّعت نفوسهم َ ناهّنأاوّنظواً قوشاهيلإ ص ْ ب َ
أعينهموإذامرّوابآيةفيهاتخويفأصغواإليهامسامعقلوبهم نوشرتفم مهطاسوأ ىلع نْوُ
ناح مهف مهناذآ لوصأ يف اهقيهشو منهج ريفز ّنأ اوّنظو
لجباههموأكفّهموركبهموأطرافأقدامهميطلبونإلىاللهفيف َ كاكرقابهم.وأمّاالنهار
ىضرممهبسحيفرظانلامهيلإرظنيحادِقلا َيْرَ بفوخلامهارَ
بدقءايقتأراربأءاملعءاملحف
ومابالقوممنمرضويقولقدخولطواولقدخالطهمأمرعظيملايرضونمنأعمالهم
القليلولايستكثرونالـكثيرفهملأنفسهممتّهمونومنأعمالهممشفقونإذازُك ّ يأحد
منهم خاف ممّا يقال له فيقول أنا أعلم بنفسي من غيري ورب ّ ي أعلم منّي بنفسي
اللّٰهمّ لا تؤاخذني بما يقولون وٱجعلني أفضل ممّا يظنّون وٱغفر لي ما لا
يعلمون. فمن علامة أحدهم أنّك ترى له قوّة في دين وحزمًا في لين وإيمانًا في
يقين وحرصًا في ً لّمجتو ةدابع يف اًعوشخو ىنغ يف اًدصقو ملح يف اً ملعو ملع اً
بلطو ةّدش يف اًربصو ةقاف يف ا al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
463 The pious in this world are people of virtue. Their speech is
rational, their garments simple, and their gait embodies humility. They
lower their eyes, avoiding what God has forbidden them to see, and
dedicate their ears to hear- ing words of wisdom that bring them
benefit. Their hearts are at peace, both in times of tribulation, and in
times of prosperity. If not for the lifespans decreed for them by God,
their souls would not tarry in their bodies for the blink of an eye but,
yearning for God's reward and fearing his punishment, they would
instantly depart. The creator's majesty in their hearts makes all else
paltry in their eyes. Paradise is before their eyes---they see it as
clearly as though they were already enjoying its blessings. Hellfire too
is before their eyes---they see it as clearly as though they were being
tortured there. Their hearts are sorrow- ful, their malice never feared,
their bodies emaciated, their needs few, and their persons chaste. They
patiently endure their few days here in this world, await-
ingthelongcomfortof thehereafter.Theirsisaprofitabletransactionbestowed
inease andsecuritybytheirLord.Theworldapproachedthem,buttheyturned away.
It shackled them, but they ransomed their souls and set themselves free.
In the night they stand in worship and recite sections of the Qurʾan.
They chant them in sweet melody, moving their own hearts to tears, and
finding there the cure for their illness. If they come across a verse
that rouses their
yearning,theyconsumeithungrily,theirheartsstretchingouttowarditinlong-
ing.Theyseeitspromisedblessingsbeforetheireyes.If theycomeacrossaverse
that stokes their fear, they incline their hearts toward its warning.
The hiss and crackle of the inferno fills the innermost recesses of
their ears. They bow their backs, laying their forehead, palms, knees,
and toes on the ground, beseeching God to free their necks from the
Fire. In the day, they are kind, wise, good, and pious. Fear has made
them as thin as arrow shafts. The onlooker thinks them ailing, but they
are not ill. He says, "They're crazy!" but they are crazed only by
something immensely grave. They are not satisfied with a few deeds of
good- ness,nordotheyconsidertheirnumerousendeavorstoomany.Theyconstantly
chide themselves and fear the consequence of their actions. If one of
them is praised, he is apprehensive, and replies, "I know myself better
than you know me, and my Lord knows me even better! Lord, do not hold me
to what they say about me, but make me more virtuous than they think I
am, and forgive those actions of which they do not know."1 Their
hallmark is strength in faith, resolve with gentleness, belief with cer-
tainty, voracity for knowledge, knowledge with maturity, temperance in
afflu- ence, humility in worship, forbearance in indigence, patience in
hardship, desire for the licit, enthusiasm in following guidance, and
aversion to greed. 1 Final lines similar to §3.90. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 464 Text
and Translation في حلال ونشاطًا في هدى وتحرّجًا عن طمع يعمل الأعمال الصالحة
وهو على وجل يمسيوهمّهالشكرويصبحوهمّهالذ ةلفغلانمرّذُحاملاًرذحاًحِرَ
فحبصيواًرِذَحتيبيرك وف َ رِحًابماأصابمنالفضل
والرحمةإنٱستصعبتعليهنفسهفيماتكرهلميعطهاسؤلها فيما تحب ّ قرّة عينه فيما لا
يزول وزهادته فيما لا يبقى يمزج الحلم بالعلم والقول بالعمل. ً ليلق هُ لمأ
اًبيرق هارت ً لهس هلكأ اًروزنم هسفن ةعناق هبلق اًعشاخ هـُ للز ا ا أمره حريزًا
دينه ميّتةشهوتهمكظومًاغيظهالخـيرمنهمأمولوالشرّمنهمأمونإنكانفيالغافلينكُتب في
الذاكرين وإن كان في الذاكرين لم يكتب من الغافلين يعفو عمّن ظلمه ويعطي من
ً لبقم هفورعم اًرضاح هركنم اًبئاغ هلوق اً نّيل هشحف اًديعب هعطق نم لصيو همرح
ا خيره مدبرًا شرّه في الزلازل وَقور وفي المكاره صَبور وفي الرخاء شَكور لا
يحيف على من يبغض ولا يأثم فيمن يحب ّ يعترف بالحقّ قبل أن يشهد عليه لا
يضيع ما ٱست ُ حفظ ولا ينسى ما ذُ كّر ولا ينابز بالألقاب ولا يضارّ بالجار
ولا يشمت بالمصائب ولا يدخل في الباطل ولا يخرج من الحقّ . إن صمت لم يغمّه
صمته وإن ضحك لم يعل صوته وإن ب ُ غي عليه صبر حتّى يكون الله هو الذي ينتقم
له نفسه منه في عناء والناس منه في راحة نّممهّوندوةهازنوٌدهزهنعدعابتنّمعهدعُ
بهسفننمسانلاحارأوهترخآلهسفنبعتأ دنا منه لين ورحمة ليس تباعده بكبر وعظمة
ولا دنوّه بمكر وخديعة. قال فصعق همّام صعقةكانت ن َ فْسُه فيها فقال أمير
المؤمنين عليه السلام أما والله لقد كنت
أخافهاعليهثمّقالهكذاتصنعالمواعظالبالغةبأهلها.فقاللهقائلفمابالكأنتياأميرالمؤمنين
فقالوَيح َ ً لهمفهزواجتيالاً ببسوهودعيالاً تقولجأ ّلكل ّنإك
الاتعدلمثلهافإنّمانفثالشيطان على لسانك. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 465 They do good while always being on guard.They spend the
night thanking God and the morning praising him. They sleep vigilant and
awake in joy, vigilant
becausetheyhavebeenwarnedagainstneglect,andjoyfulbecauseof thebless-
ings and mercy they have gained. If their ego bucks against doing
something it dislikes, they do not give it free rein to do what it
desires. Their joy is cen- tered on whatever brings lasting reward,
while they care little for ephemeral baubles that will not remain. They
combine maturity with learning and words with action. You will see
this---their needs are few, their slips are rare, their hearts are
humble, their souls are content, their fare is meager, their manner is
affable, their faith is secure, their appetite is dead, and their rage
is held in check. Their goodness is always anticipated, their evil never
feared. If they sit with the heedless, they are still numbered among the
heedful, and if they sit with the heedful, they are not numbered among
the heedless. They forgive those who oppress them, give to those who
refuse them, and foster those who cut them off. Lewdness is far removed
from their persons, gentleness imbues their words, and wrongdoing is
absent from their actions. Their decency is ever present, their goodness
always forthcoming, and their wickedness always dis- tant. In calamities
they remain dignified, in catastrophes they remain patient, in happy
times they remain thankful.They never wrong an enemy or transgress to
help loved ones. They acknowledge the dues they owe to others before
tes- timony is given against them. They never squander what they have
been given in trust, they never forget what they have been reminded of,
they never call others vile names, they never harm a neighbor, they
never gloat at another's misfortune, they never enter into wrongdoing or
abandon the truth. If they are silent, their silence is not burdensome.
If they laugh, they are not raucous. If attacked treacherously, they are
patient---God himself avenges them. They
wearythemselvesbyconstantchiding,whilenevercausingothersunease.They push
themselves to prepare for the hereafter and never cause others harm.
Chaste and upright, they stay away from those who distance themselves.
Kind and merciful, they draw near to those who seek to come close. Their
detach- ment is not out of arrogance or grandiosity, and their
accessibility is not out of cunning or trickery. Raḍī: The narrator
said: Hammām fell as though struck by a thunderbolt and died then and
there. The Commander of the Faithful exclaimed, "By God, I feared this
effect on him!" Then he continued, "This is what strong counsel does to
people who lis- ten!" A man challenged ʿAlī, "Commander of the Faithful,
how about you, then?" and ʿAlī replied angrily, "Good grief! Each
lifespan has an allotted time that it does not transgress and a cause
that it does not overstep. Slow down! Don't repeat this kind of talk
again, for it was Satan who spoke with your tongue." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 466 Text
and Translation 1.192ومن خطبة له عليه السلام يصف فيها المنافقين
نحمدهعلىماوَفّقلهمنالطاعةوذادَعنهمنالمعصية.ونسألهلمنّتهتمامًاوبحبلهٱعتصامًا.
ونشهدأنّ محمّدًاعبدهورسولهخاضإلىرضواناللهكلّ غمرةوتجرّعفيهكلّ غص ّ ةوقد ّ لأتو
نوَ ندألا هل نَ ّولَ ت ب عليه الأقصَون وخلعت إليه العرب أعنّتها وضربت الى
محاربته بطون رواحلها حتّى أنزلت بساحته عداوتها من أبعد الدار وأسحق
المزار. أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى الله وأحذّر كم أهل النفاق فإنّهم الضال ّ ون
المضلّون والزال ّ ون المزل ّ ون يتلوّنون ألوانًا ويفتنّون ٱفتنانًا ويعمدونكم
بكلّ عماد ويرصدونكم بكلّ مِرصاد
قلوبهمدويّةوصفاحهمنقيّةيمشونالخفاءويدبّونالضرّاءوصفهمدواءوقولهمشفاء وفعلهم
الداء العَياء حسدة الرخاء ومؤ كِّدوا البلاء ومقنطوا الرجاء لهم بكلّ طريق
صريع وإلى كلّ قلب شفيع ولكلّ شجو دموع يتقارضون الثناء ويتراقبون الجزاء إن
سألوا ألحفوا وإن عذلوا كشفوا وإن حكموا أسرفوا قد أعدّوا لكلّ حقّ باطل ً ا
ولكلّ قائم مائل ً ا ولكلّ حيّ قاتل ً ا ولكلّ باب مفتاحًا ولكلّ ليل مصباحًا
يتوصّلون إلى الطمع باليأس ليقيموا به أسواقهم وينفّقوا به أعلاقهم يقولون
فيشبّهون ويصفون فيموّهون قد بْزِح َكِئَٰ لوُأ﴿ نارينلا ةمُحو ناطيشلا ةمُ ل مهف
قيضملا اوعلضأو قيرطلا اوبّيه ِناَطْي َ ّشلا ُ بْزِح َ ّن ِإ اَلَأ ِ ساَ خْلاُمُه
ِناَطْي َ ّشلا َ رُونَ﴾. 1.193ومن خطبة له عليه السلام الحمد لله الذي أظهر من
آثار سلطانه وجلال كبريائه ما حيّر مُقَل العقول من عجائب قدرته وردع خطرات
هَماهِم النفوس عن عرفان كُنْه صفته. وأشهد أن لا إل ٰ ه إلّا الله شهادة إيمان
وإيقان وإخلاص وإذعان. وأشهد أنّ محمّدًا عبده ورسوله أرسله وأعلام الهدى
دارسة ومناهج الدين طامسة فصدع بالحقّ ونصح للخلق وهدى إلى الرشد وأمر
بالقصد صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
467 1.192 From an oration by ʿAlī in which he describes the hypocrites
who feign faith: We praise God for having guided us toward obedience and
guarded us from disobedience. We ask him to perfect his blessings and
help us hold fast to his rope. We testify that Muḥammad is his servant
and messenger, who plunged into every swelling wave, and swallowed every
choking morsel, to earn his plea-
sure.Closerelativesshowedtheirtruecolorsandturnedaway,whiledistantkin
banded against him; loosening their horses' reins and whipping the
bellies of their camels, Arab tribesmen raced from the furthest, most
distant abodes to fight him, until their rancor alighted in his
courtyard. Servantsof God,Icounselyoutoremainconsciousof
him!Iwarnyouagainst hypocrites, who, having strayed from the path, lead
others astray, and having slipped, cause others to slip. Chameleon-like,
they change color, change narra- tives; they aim at you from behind
every pillar and lie in wait at every lookout. Their hearts are diseased
while their faces look fresh, they walk with stealth and creep through
the thicket, their words seem to heal but their actions bring chronic
illness, they envy good fortune, magnify hardship, and destroy hope. In
every path they leave a body felled, into every heart they find access,
for every sad situation they produce false tears. They trade praises and
expect material reward. When they solicit, they do not stop, when they
turn away, they expose
yourshame,whentheyaregivenrule,theycommitallkindsof excess.Forevery
right, they have prepared an opposing wrong, for everything upright,
some- thing that will make it bend, for every living thing a killer, for
every door a key, and for every night a lamp. They nourish their greed
by creating desperation, in order to sustain their markets and sell
their expensive wares; they speak to
confuseanddescribetodelude;theyfrightenyoufromthepathandcreatecon-
fusion in the narrow defile. They are Satan's host and hellfire's
scorpion-sting. «These are Satan's faction. Hark! Satan's faction are
losers.»1 1.193 From an oration by ʿAlī: Praise God! He has revealed
traces of his authority and the magnificence of his majesty---their
mighty wonders dazzle the intellect's eyes and prevent the soul's
flashing thoughts from plumbing the depths of his attributes. I testify
with belief, certainty, sincerity, and humility that there is no god but
God. I testifythatMuḥammadishisservantandmessenger,whomhesentwhenguid-
ance's banners had frayed and religion's pathways had eroded to declare
the truth, counsel the world, guide toward virtue, and command
temperance. May God bless him and his descendants. 1 Qurʾan, Mujādalah
58:19. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 468 Text and
Translation ً لَ مَه مكـلسري ملو اً ثبع مكقلخي مل هّنأ هللا دابع اوملعٱو ا
علم مبلغ نعمه عليكم وأحصى إحسانه إليكم فٱستفتحوه وٱستنجحوه وٱطلبوا إليه
وٱستمنحوه فما قطعكم عنه حجاب ولا أغلق عنكم دونه باب وإنّه لبكلّ مكان وفي
كلّ حين وأوان ومع كلّ إنس وجانّ لا صخش هيولَ ي الو لئان هيصقتسي الو لئاس
هدفنتسي الو ءابِحلا هصقني الو ءاطعلا همِلثَي بضغ هلغشي الو بلس نع ةبِه هزُجحَت
الو توص نع توص هيهلُ ي الو صخش نع روهظلا هعطقت الو روهظلا نع نوطبلا هّنِجُت
الو باقع نع ةمحر ههِّلوُ ت الو ةمحر نع
عنالبطونقربفنأىوعلافدناوظهرفبطنوبطنفعلنودَانَولمي ُ دَنْ لميذرأالخلق بٱحتيال
ولا ٱستعان بهم لكَلال. أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى الله فإنّها الزِّمام والقِوام
فتمسّكوا بوثائقها وٱعتصموا ٍمْوَ ي﴿ يفّزعلا لزانمو زرحلا لقاعمو ةعسلا ناطوأو
ةعدلا نانكأ ىلإ مكب ْلُؤَ ت اهقئاقحب ت َ شْخَص ُ فِيهِ الْأَبْصَارُ﴾وت ُ روصلا يف
خفنيو راشِعلا مورُص هيف ل َ ّطعتو راطقألا هل مِلظ ْ لَصريصيفخساورلا
ّمصلاوخماوشلا ّمشلا ّلذتوةجهَ ل ّلكمَكبَتوةجهُم ّلكقهزتف دهاسرابًا َ لْمَس اًعاق
اهدهعمو اً قَ رقَر قًا فلا شفيع يشفع ولا حميم يدفع ولا معذرة تنفع. 1.194ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام بعثه حين لا علم قائم ولا منار ساطع ولا منهج واضح.
أوصيكم عباد الله بتقوى الله وأحذّر كم الدنيا فإنّها دار شخوص ومحل ّ ة
تنغيص ساكنها ظاعن وقاطنها بائن تميد بأهلها مَي َ دان السفينة تصفّقها
العواصف في لُج َ ج البحار فمنهم الغَرِق الوَب ِ ق ومنهم الناجي على متون
الأمواج تَحفِزه الرياح بأذيالها وتحمله على أهوالها فما غَرِق منها فليس
بمستدرك وما نجا منها فإلى مَهلك. عباد الله الآن فٱعملوا والألسن مطلقة
والأبدان صحيحة والأعضاء ل َ دْنة والمتقلّب فسيح والمجال عريض قبل إرهاق
الفوت وحلول الموت فحقّقوا عليكم نزوله ولا تنتظروا قدومه. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
469 Servantsof God!KnowthatGodhasnotcreatedyouinjest,norcutyouloose
without direction. He knows the extent of his blessings and keeps track
of his bounties, so ask him to grant you victory and success, seek his
favors and gen- erosity. No veil separates you from his favors, nor is
any door to him closed. He
ispresentineveryplace,ineachtimeandmoment,witheveryhumanandjinn.
Generosity does not deplete his possessions, charity does not decrease
them, supplicants do not use them up, and gifts do not drain their
depths. One person
doesnotdiverthisattentionfromanother,nordoesonevoicedistracthimfrom
another. But giving also does not prevent him from taking away. Anger
does not preoccupy him from mercy, nor does mercy confound him from
punishing.The visible does not block him from the hidden, nor does the
hidden separate him from the visible. He is close yet distant,
transcendent yet near, manifest yet hid- den, hidden yet open, and close
yet utterly beyond reach. He did not create the world through artifice,
nor did fatigue ever prompt him to solicit help. Servants of God! I
counsel you to be conscious of God! Piety is your harness
andmainstay.Holdfasttoitsropesandseekprotectioninitstruths,fortheywill
lead you to comfortable dwellings, expansive homelands, protective
fortresses, and mighty abodes, on «the day when eyes stare fixedly in
terror»,1 the earth falls dark, camel mares in full term are abandoned,
and the horn is blown.2 At that time, spirits will perish, and tongues
will be struck dumb. Lofty peaks and rugged rocks will crumble, their
hardness will turn into a shifting mirage, their fastness will convert
to bare, flat desert. In that moment, no intercessor will intercede, no
kin will offer protection, no excuse will avail. 1.194 From an oration
by ʿAlī: God sent Muḥammad when no waymark was raised, no beacon shone,
and there was no clear road. Servants of God! I counsel you to be
conscious of God! I warn you of this world, a habitation you must
vacate, a quarter plagued by suffering; its tenants must depart, and its
occupants must leave. It heaves---with its people---like a ship tossed
by stormy winds on the swells of the deep sea; some drown and perish,
while others are saved on waves whose strong currents carry them away
and dash them into further dangers; those who drown cannot be saved,
while those who are saved will still die. Servants of God, take heed
now! Act while tongues are free, bodies are sound, limbs are pliant, the
course is free, and the track is open. Act before this chance is gone
and death arrives. Know that it will come upon you---don't delay until
it is here. 1 Qurʾan, Ibrāhīm 14:42. 2 Reference to Qurʾan,Takwīr 81:4,
Nabaʾ 78:18. Camel mares in full term would in normal times be the most
carefully tended. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 470 Text and
Translation 1.195ومن خطبة له عليه السلام ولقد علم المستحفظون من أصحاب
محمّد صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله أن ّ ىلع الو هللا ىلع َ ّدُرَأ مل ي رسوله ساعة
قط ّ ولقد واسَيته بنفسي في المواطن التي تنكص فيها الأبطال وتتأخّر فيها ّ
لص هللا لوسر ضبُ ق دقلو .اهب هللا ينمركأ ةدْجَن مادقألا ى الله عليه وآله
وإنّ رأسه لعلى صدري ولقد سالت نفسه في كفّي فأمررتها على وجهي ولقد وليت
غسله والملائكة أعواني فضَجّت الدار والأفنية ملأ ٌيهبط وملأ يعرج وما فارقت
سمعي هَين َ مةٌ منهم رئاصب ىلع اوذفنٱف اً تّيمو اً ّيح يّنم هب ّقحأ اذ نمف
هحيرض يف هانيَراو ىّتح هيلع نوّلصي كم ولتصدق نيّاتكم في جهاد عدوّكم فو الله
الذي لا إل ٰ ه إلّا هو إن ّ ي لعلى جادّة الحقّ وإنّهم لعلى مزل ّ ة الباطل.
أقول ما تسمعون وأستغفر الله لي ولـكم. 1.196ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
1.196.1نانيِّنلافالتخٱوتاولخلايفدابعلايصاعموتاوَ لَفلايفشوحولاجيجَعملعي
فيالبحار الغامرات وتلاطمالماءبالرياح العاصفات.وأشهدأنّ محمّدًانجيبالله
وسفير وحيه ورسول رحمته. أمّا بعد. فإن ّ ي أوصيكم بتقوى الله الذي ٱبتدأ
خلقكم وإليه يكون معاد مكتبِ لَط حاجن هبو مك وإليه منتهى رغبتكم ونحوه قصد
سبيلـكم وإليه مرامي مفزعكم فإنّ تقوى الله دواء داء
قلوبكموبصرعمىأفئدتكموشفاءمرضأجساد كموصلاحفسادصدور كموطهوردنس
أنفسكموجلاءعشا١أبصار كموأمنفزعجأشكموضياءسوادظلمتكم.فٱجعلواطاعةالله
شعارًادوندثار كمودخيل ً ادونشعار كمولطيفًابينأضلاعكموأميًرافوقأمور كمومنهل
ً ا ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ونسخةفيھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩غشا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 471 1.195 From an oration by ʿAlī:1 Muḥammad's true
companions know that never, not in a single instance, have I ever
renounced God or his Messenger. I laid down my life to protect him dur-
ing times so fraught that champions hesitated, and all feet
floundered---my courage was a gift from God. Moreover, the Messenger
died with his head on my chest, and his spirit flowed out over my palm,
and I put my palm to my face directly. I undertook his final ablution
with angels as my helpers---the house and courtyard rang out as one
group descended and another ascended, each praying over him, my ears
hearing every soft invocation, until we buried him in his grave. Who is
closer to him, alive or dead, than I? Act with perception, people, and
fight your enemy with true courage! I swear by the God save whom there
is no god, that I walk the firm path of right, they flounder on the
slippery slope of wrong. I say what you hear, and seek God's forgiveness
for me and for you. 1.196 From an oration by ʿAlī: 1.196.1 He knows the
bellowing of beasts in the forest, the sins his servants commit in
private, the movements of fish in the deep oceans, and the crashing of
waters tossed by stormy winds. I testify that Muḥammad is God's noble
rep- resentative, the ambassador who conveyed his revelation, and the
messenger who brought his mercy. And now to the matter at hand: I
counsel you to be conscious of God, who created you in the beginning, to
whom you shall return. With him lies your petition's success, in him
rests your hopes' realization. Your path leads to him, in him you will
find protec- tion. Consciousness of God is the remedy for your sick
hearts, the bringer of sight to your blind spirits, the cure for your
diseased bodies, the healing for your corrupt breasts, the purification
of your begrimed souls, the luster for your impaired eyes, the safeguard
for your fearful minds, and the light for your black darkness. Wear it
as an undergarment, not just as an outer robe, wear it next to your
skin, not simply as an undergarment. Make it the essence that 1 At
Ṣiffīn in 37/657, in response to orations by Muʿāwiyah and ʿAmr ibn
al-ʿĀṣ, in which they urged their Syrian army to fight ʿAlī and accused
him of breaking his oath of allegiance and spilling blood unjustly
(Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 223--224). "Muḥammad's true companions," lit.
"custodians (mustaḥfaẓūn) from among Muḥammad's Companions," are
explained by com- mentators as being (1) the first three historical
caliphs, Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, and ʿUthmān, or (2) the learned. The statement
about ʿAlī's never having disobeyed the Prophet is an oblique crit-
icism of ʿUmar's objections to Muḥammad's truce at Ḥudaybiyyah. Ḥ10:179;
R 2:292; B 612; details of Muḥammad's final moments and ʿAlī's
performance of his ablutions are recounted in Ḥ10:183--187; B 612--613.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 472 Text and
Translation لحـينوِرد كموشفيعًالدركطلبتكموجُنّةًليومفزعكمومصابيحلبطونقبور
لوطلاً نكسومك وحشتكمونفَسًالـكربمواطنكمفإنّ
طاعةاللهحرزمنمتالفمكتنفةومخاوفمتوقّعة
وأُوارِنيرانموقدة.فمنأخذبالتقوىعزبتعنهالشدائدبعددنوّهاوٱحلولتلهالأمور بعد
مرارتها وٱنفرجت عنه الأمواج بعد تراكمها وأسهلت له الصعاب بعد إنصابها
وهطلتعليهالـكرامةبعدقحوطهاوتحدّبتعليهالرحمةبعدنفورهاوتفجّرتعليهالنعم بعد
نضوبها ووبلت عليه البر كة بعد إرذاذها فٱتّقوا الله الذي نفعكم بموعظته
ووعظكم برسالته وٱمتنّ عليكم بنعمته فعَبِّدوا أنفسكم لعبادته وأخرجوا إليه من
حقّ طاعته. 1.196.2ثمّإن هذا الإسلام دين الله الذي ٱصطفاه لنفسه وٱصطنعه على
عينه وأصفاه هءادعأ ناهأو هعفرب للملا عضوو هتّزعب نايدألا ّلذأ هتّبحم ىلع
همئاعد ماقأو هقلخ ةرَ يِخ
بكرامتهوخذلمُحادّيهبنصرهوهدمأركانالضلالةبركنهوسقىمَنعطشمنحياضه وأَتْأَق َ ف
الو هتورعل ماصفنٱ ال هلعجّمث .هحتاوَ مب ضايحلا َ كّ لحلقته ولا ٱنهدام
لآساسه ولا زوال لدعائمه ولا ٱنقلاع لشجرته ولا ٱنقطاع لمدّته ولا عفاء
لشرائعه ولا حَزّ١ لفروعه ولا ضنك لطرقه ولا وعوثة لسهولته ولا سواد لوَ ض َ
حه ولا عِوَج لٱنتصابه ولا
عَصَلفيعودهولاوَعْثلفجّهولاٱنطفاءلمصابيحهولامَرارةلحلاوته.فهودعائمأساخَ فيالحقّ
أسناخهاوثبتلها آساسهاوينابيعغَزُرتعيونها ومصابيحشُبّت نيرانها ومنار ٱقتدى
بها سُفّارها وأعلام ق ُ صد بها فِجاجها ومناهل رَوِي بها وُرّادها. جعل الله فيه
منتهىرضوانهوذروةدعائمهوسنامطاعتهفهوعنداللهوثيقالأركانرفيعالبنيانمنير
١م،ي:كذا.ن،ش،ھ: ⟩جذّ⟨.ي: ⟩حدّ⟨.نسخةفيھ: ⟩حذّ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 473 penetrates your ribs, the commander who governs your
affairs, the waterhole where you drink, the advocate for your petition,
the shield that will protect you on the day of dread, the lamp in the
hollow of your grave, the comforter dur- ing your long, lonely
suffering, and the air that helps you breathe during the anguish of your
battles. Obedience to God is an amulet that protects against encroaching
dangers, looming perils, and blazing fires. Whoever is conscious of God
finds troubles retreat after having approached, concerns sweeten after
bitterness, waves recede after whipping up, hardships ease after
exhaustion,
generosityflowafterdrought,mercycomeforwardafterhavingfled,favorsgush
outafterdrainingaway,andblessingspourdownafterscantyrain.Beconscious of
God---he aided you with his guidance, counselled you with his message,
and blessed you with his favors. Devote yourselves to his worship and
discharge your duties of obedience to him. 1.196.2 Islam is God's
religion that he chose for himself and fashioned in front of his eyes.1
He bestowed it upon the best of his creation,2 and raised its pillars
upon his love. He humbled all religions by honoring it, lowered all
nations by elevating it, shamed all enemies by giving it renown,
chastened all challengers by giving it victory, razed error's columns by
erecting its column, slaked the thirsty from its pools, and filled these
pools through its watercarri- ers' efforts. He has made it such that its
handle will never break, its links will never separate, its foundations
will never be destroyed, its pillars will never cease to stand, its tree
will never be uprooted, its time will never end, its ways will never be
effaced, its branches will never be chopped, its paths will never become
narrow, its ease will never change to harshness, its dawn will never
dim, its straightness will never twist, its shaft will never warp, its
canyon will never become rutted, its lamps will never be extinguished,
and its sweetness will never turn bitter. It is built with columns whose
bases are embedded in truth and whose pediments are strong, it has
wellsprings whose water gushes,
lampswhoseflamesrisehigh,beaconsbywhichtravelersareguided,waymarks by
which mountain passes are indicated, and watering places where thirst is
slaked. God is pleased with his religion.3 He has made it the pinnacle
of his pillars and the summit of obedience. It stands before God, column
compact, 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Ṭāhā 20:39. 2 The Shiʿi commentators
interpret "the best of his creation" (khayrata/khiyarata khalqihi) as
Muḥammadandhisdescendants(B617;R2:301--302),theSunnicommentatorsas(2)allMus-
lims (Ḥ10:192). 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Māʾidah 5:3, Āl ʿImrān 3:19.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 474 Text and
Translation اوّدأو هوعبّتٱو هوفّرشف راثَ ملا زِوعُم رانملا فرشم ناطلسلا زيزع
نارينلا ءيضم ناهربلا إليه حقّه وضعوه مواضعه. 1.196.3ثمّ إنّ الله سبحانه بعث
محمّدًا صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بالحقّ حين دنا من الدنيا الانقطاع وأقبل من
الآخرة الاطّلاع وأظلمت بهجتها بعد إشراق وقامت بأهلها على ساق وخشن منها
مهاد وأَزِف َ منها قياد في ٱنقطاع من مدّتها وٱقتراب من أشراطها وتصرّم من
أهلها وٱنفصام من حلقتها وٱنتشار من سببها وعَفاء من أعلامها وتكشّف
منعوراتهاوقِصَرمنطولها.جعلهاللهسبحانهبلاغًالرسالتهو كرامةلأمّتهوربيعًالأهل
.هراصنأل اً فرشو هناوعأل ةعفرو هنامز 1.196.4كرديالاً
رحبوهدّقوتوبخيالاًجارسوهحيباصمأفطتالاًرونباتكلاهيلعلزنأّمث قعرهومنهاجًالايضلّ
نهجهوشعاعًالايظلمضوءه١وفرقانًالايخمدبرهانهوبنيانًالاتهدم ندعم وهف .هناوعأ
لذخت ال ا ً ّقحو هراصنأ مزهت ال ا ً ّزعو هماقسأ ىشخت ال ءافشو هناكرأ
الإيمانوبُحبوحتهوينابيعالعلموبحورهورياضالعدلوغ ُ
دْرانهوأَثافيّالإسلاموبنيانه ال لهانمو نوحتاملا اهبضنُ ي ال نويعو نوفزنتسملا
هفزني ال رحبو هناطيغو ّقحلا ةيدوأو يغيضها الواردون ومنازل لا يضلّ نهجها
المسافرون وأعلام لا يعمى عنها السائرون ءاهقفلا بولقل اًعيبرو ءاملعلا شطعل
اً ّيِر هللا هلعج .نودصاقلا ٢اهنع زوجي ال ماكآو ً لبحو ةملظ هعم سيل اًرونو
ءاد هدعب سيلًءاودو ءاحلصلا قرطل َ ّجاحَمو ا وثيقًا عروته ومعقل ً هلحتنٱ نمل
اًرذعو هبّمتئٱ نمل ىدهو هلخد نمل اً ملسو هاّلوت نمل ا ً ّزعو هتورذ اًعينم ا ً
لماحو هب ّجاح نمل اًجْلُ فو هب مصاخ نمل اًدهاشو هب مّلكت نمل اًناهربو ا لمن
حمله ومطيّة نمل اً مكُحو ىور نمل اًثيدحو ىعو نمل اً ملِعو مألتسٱ نمل ةّنُجو مسّوت
نمل ةيآو هلمعأ نمل قضى. ١ن، ش، ي، ھ، ونسخة في م: كذا. وأصل م: ⟩نوره⟨.
٢م، ي، ونسخة في ھ: كذا. ش، ن، وأصلھ: ⟩وإماملايجوزعنه⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
475 edifice exalted, proof shining, fires burning, power mighty, and
beacon raised, impossible to destroy.1 So honor it, follow it, give it
its due, and accord it the position it deserves. 1.196.3 God sent
Muḥammad with the truth when the end of the world had drawn near and the
next life had approached, when her splendor had dulled after long
brightness, her people confronted attack, her bed had turned rough, and
her reins had become slack. This was a time when the world's lifespan
was drawing to a close, her signs were at hand, her people were mowed
down, her ropes had frayed, her waymarks were effaced, her shame was
manifest, and her long rope had been cut. God made Muḥammad the bearer
of his message, honor for his community, springtime for his people,
exaltation for his helpers, and distinction for his allies. 1.196.4 God
revealed to him the Book---a light whose flame cannot be extin- guished,
a lamp whose glow cannot be hidden, a sea whose depths cannot be
plumbed, a road whose course does not mislead, a ray whose brightness
never darkens, a dawn whose proof is never extinguished, an edifice
whose columns cannot be razed, a cure after which no disease is feared,
might whose sup- porters are never vanquished, and truth whose
proponents are never bested. It forms the mine and home of belief, the
founts and seas of wisdom, the mead- ows and pools of justice, the frame
and edifice of Islam, and the valleys and orchards of truth. It holds a
mighty river that water-seekers cannot exhaust, wellsprings that
water-drawers cannot deplete, waterholes that drinkers can- not drain,
waystations that travelers cannot miss, waymarks to which wayfarers
cannot remain blind, and highlands that travelers cannot circumvent. God
has made it water to quench the thirst of the learned, springtime for
the hearts of
thewise,thehighroadforthepioustowalk,ahealingafterwhichthereisnoill-
ness,a light alongsidewhichthereisnodarkness,ahandlewhosegripisstrong,
and a fortress whose ramparts are never stormed. It gives might to those
who are loyal, peace to those who enter, guidance to those who follow,
defense for those who adhere, proof to those who articulate, witness to
those who argue, victory to those who fight, support for those who
carry, steeds for those who ride, signs for those who foretell, shields
for those who seek armor, knowledge
forthosewhoheed,truthforthosewhonarrate,anddiscernmentforthosewho judge.
1 Ar. muʿwiz al-mathār; translation based on Ḥ10:193; R 2:303; or
"difficult to excavate," referring to the treasures of its wisdom, based
on B 619. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 476 Text and
Translation 1.197ومن كلام له عليه السلام كان يوصي به أصحابه تعاهدوا أمر
الصلاة وحافظوا عليها وٱستكثروا منها وتقرّبوا بها فإنّها ﴿كَانَت َ لَ ع ْ ى
الْم ُ َ ـلَس اَم﴿ اولئس نيح رانلا لهأ باوج ىلإ نوعمست الأ﴾اًتوُ قْو َ ّم اًباَ
تِك َنيِنِمْؤ كَكُمْ َ ل اوُ لاَ قَ رَقَس يِف مْ ن َ كُ مِنَ الْم ُ َ تَ ل اهّنإو﴾َنيِّلَص حُت ّ
الذنوب حَت قالطإ اهقلطتو قرولا َ ّ الرِّب َ ق وشبّهها رسول الله صل ّ ى الله
عليه بالح َ مّة تكون على باب الرجل فهو يغتسل منها نم اهّقح فرع دقو نَر َ
ّدلا نم هيلع ىقبي نأ ىسع امف تاّرم سمخ ةليللاو مويلا يف
المؤمنينالذينلايشغلهمعنهازينةمتاعولاقرّةعينمنولدولاماليقولاللهسبحانه ِ
هيِهْلُ ت ا َ ّل ٌلاَجِر﴿ مْ ت ِذ نَع ٌعْيَب اَلَوٌةَراَ ج ِ صلا ِماَ ق ِإَوِهّٰللاِرْك َ ل َ
ّ لوسر ناكو﴾ِةاَكَ ّزلاِءاَتي ِإَوِةا اللهصل ّ ىاللهعليهوآلهن َ َ لْهَأ ْرُمْأَو﴿
هناحبسهللالوقلةّنجلابهلريشبتلادعبةالصلاباً بِص كَ بِالص َ ل َ ّ عم تلعج
ةاكزلا ّنإّمث .هسفن اهيلع ربصيو هلهأ اهب رمأي ناكف﴾اَ هْيَ لَ ع ْرِبَطْصٱَوِةا
الصلاة قربانًا لأهل الإسلام فمن أعطاها طيّب النفس بها فإنّها تجعل لهكفّارة
ومن َ هَ ل اهيلع ّنرثكي الو هسفن دحأ اهّنعبتي الف ةياقوو اًزاجح رانلا فه
وإنّ منأعطاها غير طيّب
النفسبهايرجوبهاماهوأفضلمنهافهوجاهلبالسنّةمغبونالأجرضالّ العملطويل الندم.
ثمّأداء الأمانة فقد خاب من ليس من أهلها إنّها عرضت على السموات المبنيّة
والأرضينالم َ دحوّةوالجبالذاتالطولالمنصوبةفلاأطولولاأعرضولاأعلىولا أعظم
منها ولو ٱمتنع شيء بطول أو عرض أو قوّة أو عزّ لٱمتنعن ولـكن أشفقن من ُهَ ّن
ِإ ُناَسن ِإْلا﴿ وهو ّنهنم فعضأ وه نم لهج ام نلقعو ةبوقعلا .﴾اًلْوُهَج اًموُ لَظ
َناَك إنّ الله سبحانهلا يخفىعليه ما العبادمقترفون في ليلهم ونهارهم ل َ طُف
َ به خُبْرًا وأحاط ؤاضعأ اً ملع هب كم شهوده وجوارحكم جنوده وضمائر كم عيونه
وخلواتكم عيانه. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
477 1.197 From an address by ʿAlī with which he would counsel his
associates:1 Be diligent in the matter of the ritual prayer---pray
regularly and frequently, and seek to come closer to God through it, for
it is «prescribed for believ- ers at fixed times.»2 Have you not heard
the people of hell when they were asked, «"What led you into the Fire?"
and they answered, "We were not among those who prayed"».3 Prayer makes
sins fall from you like leaves and loosens their bonds from your necks.
God's Messenger compared it to a hot spring located at a man's doorstep,
one that he can bathe in five times in one day and night---tell me, what
grime will remain on his body then? Prayer's value is
recognizedbybelieverswhoarenotdivertedbygildedfurnitureorthegratifica-
tions of children and herds, believers God praises as «men whom neither
trade nor commerce divert from remembering God, from performing the
prayer, or submitting the alms-levy».4 Even after being pledged
paradise, the Messenger exerted himself to the utmost in prayer, for God
instructed him, «command
yourfamilytopray,andadheretoityourself»5---hethuscommandedhisfamily to
pray, and adhered to it himself. Second, be assiduous in offering the
alms- levy, which, alongside the ritual prayer, is a means for the
followers of Islam to obtain closeness to God. Whoever gives it freely
and happily will find that it serves as expiation for his sins and a
barrier and shield against hellfire. Let no one yearn for it after
giving it or mourn its loss! For whoever gives it unwill- ingly, hoping
only for material benefit, is ignorant of the Sunnah and will be cheated
of its reward; his deed will be lost and his regret will persist. Third,
be careful to uphold trust---whoever does so will not fail. Indeed, the
trust was offered to the lofty skies, the outspread earth, and the
towering, deep-rooted mountains---there is nothing taller, or broader,
or higher, or greater than they, andif anythingcouldhaveborneitbecauseof
height,orbreadth,orstrength,or
mightitwouldhavebeenthey.Buttheyfearedthepunishmentandunderstood what
was not recognized by a weaker being, «the human, for he was a tyrant,
an ignoramus.»6 The sins that God's servants commit at night or by day
are not concealed from him. His awareness of them is total, his
knowledge encom-
passesthemfully:yourlimbsarehiswitnesses,7yourbodiesarehisarmies,your
hearts are his spies, and your private conversations are open to him. 1
Kulaynī's report (Kāfī, 5;36) says ʿAlī would counsel his followers thus
ahead of any battle--- perhaps as a testament, in anticipation of his
death. 2 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:103. 3 Qurʾan, Muddaththir 74:42--43. 4 Qurʾan,
Nūr 24:37. 5 Qurʾan, Ṭāhā 20:132. 6 Qurʾan, Aḥzāb 33:72; the lines
leading up to it are a modified quote from the earlier part of the same
verse. 7 Reference to Qurʾan, Nūr 24:24. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 478 Text
and Translation 1.198ومن كلام له عليه السلام والله ما معاوية بأدهى منّي
ولـكنّه يغدر ويفجر ولولا كراهية الغدر لـكنت من أدهى الناس ولـكنّ كلّ غ َ
دْرة فَج ْ رة وكلّ فَج ْ .ةمايقلا موي هب فرعُ ي ءاول رداغ ّلكلو ةرْفَكةر والله
ما أُست َ غفل بالمكيدة ولا أُست َ غمز بالشديدة. 1.199ومن كلام له عليه
السلام أيّها الناس لا تستوحشوا في طريق الهدى لقل ّ ة أهله فإنّ الناس قد
ٱجتمعوا على مائدة شِب َ عُها قصير وجُوعها طويل. أيّها الناس إنّما يجمع الناس
الرضاء والسخط وإنّما عقر َ ف﴿ هناحبس لاقف ءاضرلاب هوّمع اّ مل باذعلاب هللا
مهّمعف دحاو لجر دومث ةقان عَقَر ُ وهَا ف َ أَصْب َ حُوا نَادِمِينَ﴾فما كان إلّا أن
خارت أرضهم بالخ َ سْفة خُوار السِّكّة المُحْمَاة في يف عقو فلاخ نمو ءاملا درو
حضاولا قيرطلا كلس نم سانلا اهّيأ .ةراّوـَ خلا ضرألا التيه.
1.200ومنكلاملهعليهالسلامرويعنهأنّهقالهعنددفنسيّدةالنساءفاطمةعليهاالسلام
كالمناجي به رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله عند قبره .كب قاح َ ّللا
ةعيرسلاو كراوج يف ةلزانلا كتنبٱ نعو يّنع هللا لوسر اي كيلع مالسلا ق َ لّ
يا رسول الله عن صفيّتك صبري ورق ّ عنها تجل ّ دي إلّا أنّ لي في التأسّي بعظيم
َ ت عضوم كتبيصم حدافو كتقرُ ف ُ تْد َ ّسَو دقلف ٍّزَع ك في ملحودة قبرك وفاضت
بين نحري ةنيهرلاتذخُأوةعيدولاتعجرُ تسٱدقلف﴾َنوُعِجاَرِهْيَ ل ِإاَ ّن ِإَوِهللِاَ ّن
ِإ﴿ كسْفنيردصو أمّاحزنيفسرمدٌوأمّاليليفمـ ُ
كئّبنتسو.ميقماهبتنأيتلاكراديلهللاراتخينأىلإد َ ّهس ٱبنتك فأَحْفِها السؤال
وٱستخبرها الحال هذا ولم ي َ طُل العهد ولم يَخلُ منك الذ كر. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
479 1.198 From an address by ʿAlī:1 By God, Muʿāwiyah is not more astute
than I, but he deceives and lies. If I did not abhor deception, I would
be the most cunning of people, but every act of deception is a lie,
every lie is an act of unbelief, and every deceiver will be given a
banner by which he shall be known on judgment day.2 But, by God, I am
not one to be taken unawares by a plot or found weak in the face of
adversity! 1.199 From an address by ʿAlī:3 People! Do not be nervous
about following the path of guidance because its fol-
lowersarefew.Thepublichasgatheredroundatablewheresatietyisshort,and
hunger will be long. People! Approval and disapproval unite people. Only
one man slaughtered Thamūd's camel mare, but God included them all in
his pun- ishment because they united in approving his act. God said,
«They slaughtered the mare, and in the morning, they had cause to
regret.»4 For their land roared and was swallowed up with its
inhabitants, like a fire-seared ploughshare hiss- ing as it sinks into
soft soil. People! Whoever follows the trodden path reaches water.
Whoever strays dies in the scorching desert. 1.200 From words uttered by
ʿAlī just after he had buried the queen of all women, Fāṭimah, at the
graveside of God's Messenger:5 Salutationstoyou,Messengerof
God,frommeandfromyourdaughterwhohas come to stay with you. I have little
strength to bear the loss of your cherished one, O Messenger of God! My
endurance is broken! But I bore the anguish of your separation and the
calamity of your passing and shall strive to endure this too. It was I
who placed you in the hollow of your grave. You breathed your last with
your head resting between my neck and chest. «Truly, to God we belong
and to him we shall return!»6 The deposit has been reclaimed and the
loan has been repossessed, but my grief will remain forever, my nights
will be wake- ful evermore, until the time when God transports me to the
home where you now reside. Your daughter will inform you, so press her
to answer, and find out from her what has happened to us---so soon, when
your memory was still fresh among the people! Salutations to you both
from one who bids you farewell, but not because of aversion or fatigue.
When I take my leave, it is not because I 1 Delivered in the Grand
Mosque in Kufa, presumably after the arbitration in 37/658 (Kulaynī,
Kāfī, 2:338). On Muʿāwiyah's and ʿAlī's strategies of governance and
warfare, see Ḥ10:212--260; B 626--627. 2 Modified quote of the Prophet's
hadith, Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §1.162. 3 Delivered in the Grand Mosque in Kufa
during ʿAlī's caliphate, presumably between 37/658 and 40/661. Ibn Abī
Zaynab, Ghaybah, 37. 4 Qurʾan, Shuʿarāʾ 26:157. 5 Delivered in Medina in
11/632. 6 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:156. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 480 Text and
Translation والسلام عليكما سلام مودِّع لا قالٍ ولا سَئِم فإن أنصرف فلا عن
مَلالة وإن أُقم فلا عن سوء ظنّ بما وعد الله الصابرين. 1.201ومن كلام له عليه
السلام أيّها الناس إنّما الدنيا دار مجاز والآخرة دار قرار فخذوا من ممرّكم
لمقرّكم ولا تهتكوا أستار كم عند من يعلم أسرار كم وأخرجوا من الدنيا قلوبكم
من قبل أن تُخر َ ج منها أبدانكم ام ةكئالملا تلاقو كرت ام سانلا لاق كله
اذإ ءرملا ّنإ .متقلُخ اهريغلو متربُ تخٱ اهيفف قدّم. لله آباؤ ١.مكيلع نوكيف
اً ّ لُك اوفّلخت الو مكـل نكي اًضعب اومّدقف مك 1.202ومن كلام له عليه السلام
كان كثيرًا ما ينادي به أصحابه تجهّزوا رحمكم الله فقد نودي فيكم بالرحيل
وأقلّوا العُرْجة على الدنيا وٱنقلبوا بصالح ما بحضرتكم من الزاد فإنّ أمامكم
عَقَبةكَؤودًا ومنازل مَخوفة مَهولة لا بدّ من الورود عليها والوقوف عندها.
وٱعلموا أنّ ملاحظ المنيّة نحو كم دائبة٢ وكأنّكم بم َ خالبها وقد ن َ شِبت
فيكم وقد دهمتكم فيها مُفظعات الأمور ومُضلعات المحذور فقطّعوا علائق الدنيا
وٱستظهروا بزاد التقوى. وقد مضى شيء من هذا الكلام فيما تقدّم بخلاف هذه
الرواية. 1.203ومن كلام له عليه السلام كلّم به طلحة والزبير بعد بيعته
بالخلافة وقد عتبا من ترك مشاورتهما والاستعانة في الأمور بهما ١ن، ش، م،
ھ: كذا. ي، وزيادة في هامش ش، م، ھ: ⟩فقدّموا بعضًا يكن لـكم قرضًا ولا .⟨اً ّ
لَك مكيلع نوكيف اً ّ لُك اوفّلخت ٢ن، ھ، ي، ش، ونسخة في م: كذا. م، ونسخة في
ش، ي: ⟩دانية⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
481 wearied of grieving. When I stay, it is not from lack of faith in
God's promise to the patient. 1.201 From an address by ʿAlī: People!The
world is a passage and the hereafter your permanent home. Gather
supplies from your abode of transience for your abode of residence. Do
not rend your veils before one who knows all your secrets. Remove your
hearts from the world before your bodies are removed from it. Here you
are tested, but you are created for another home. When a man dies,
people ask, "What did he leave behind?" while the angels inquire, "What
has he sent on ahead?" May God reward your fathers! Send ahead a portion
that will remain yours. Do not leave everything behind, for that will
count against you. 1.202 From words ʿAlī often addressed in oration to
his associates:1 Gather your supplies---May God have mercy on you!---for
the call has come to depart. Lessen your inclination toward the world
and see that you leave your present life with provisions. A tough ascent
lies ahead with fearsome and
strangewaystationsthroughwhichyoumustpassandatwhichyoumustalight. Know
this: Death homes in on you. Imagine that you are already trying to ward
off its claws, that its horrors and fearsome calamities are already upon
you. Cut off all ties to this world and prepare provisions of piety.
Raḍī: Similar lines have been recorded earlier in a different version.2
1.203 From an address by ʿAlī to Ṭalḥah and Zubayr when---after pledging
allegiance to him as caliph---they reproached him for not consulting
them or seeking their assis- tance in governing:3 1 Delivered regularly
in the Grand Mosque in Kufa during ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661.
Ṣadūq(Amālī,402--403,Majlis75),says:"TheCommanderof
theFaithfulwouldpraytheʿishāʾ night-prayer, then call out thrice, so all
the people in the mosque would hear him: (the text)." Similar tag in
Mufīd, Irshād, 2:234. Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 420), says: "The Commander of
the Faithful would call out every night, in the face of the morning:
(the text of the first half)." He cites the second half as part of an
oration (of which §1.96 is another part) in the mosque in Basra, a few
days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (ibid., 236). 2 Possibly
referring to §1.182. 3 Delivered in Medina in 35/656, soon after ʿAlī
received the pledge. ʿAlī rescinded the earlier caliphs' practice of
graded stipends and gave everyone an equal share from the state treasury
(similar context in §1.124). Ṭalḥah and Zubayr were unhappy with this
new arrangement and complained. When ʿAlī replied as he did in this
address, they sought leave to go to Mecca, and once there, planned with
ʿĀʾishah a revolt against him, which resulted in the Battle of the
Camel. On the events leading up to this address, and the address itself,
see Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 112-- 114. OnṬalḥah's and Zubayr's pledge to ʿAlī
and their subsequent breaking of it, see Ḥ11:10--20. See also §3.186.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 482 Text and
Translation لقد نقمتما يسيرًا وأرجأتما كثيرًا ألا تُخـبِراني أي ّ شيء لـكما
فيه حقّ دفعتكما عنه أو أي ّ قِسمٱستأثرتعليكمابهأمأي ّ حقّ
رفعهإليّأحدمنالمسلمينضعفتعنهأمجهلتهأم أخطأت بابه. والله ما كانت لي في
الخلافة رغبة ولا في الوِلاية إربة ولـٰكنّكم دعوتموني إليها وحملتموني عليها
فلمّا أفضت إليّ نظرت إلى كتاب الله وما وضع لنا وأمرنا بالحكم به فٱتّبعته
وما ٱستسنّ النبيّ صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فٱقتديته فلم أحتج في ذلك إلى
رأيكما ولا
رأيغيركماولميقعحكمجهلتهفأستشيركماوإخوانيمنالمسلمينولوكانذلكلمأرغب عنكما
ولا عن غيركما. وأمّا ما ذ كرتما من أمر الإسوة فإنّ ذلك أمر لم أحكم أنا فيه
برأيي ولا وليته هوًى منّي بل وجدت أنا وأنتما ما جاء به رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله قد فرغ منهفلمأحتجإليكمافيماقدفرغاللهمنق َ
سْمهوأمضىفيهحكمهفليسلـكماواللهعندي ولا لغيركما في هذا عُتبى. أخذ الله
بقلوبكم وقلوبنا إلى الحقّ وألهمنا وإيّاكم الصبر. ثمّقال عليه السلام
رحماللهرجل ً .هبحاصىلع ّقحلاباًنوعناكوهّدرفاًروجىأروأهيلعناعأفا ً ّقحىأرا
1.204ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد سمع قومًا من أصحابه يسبّون أهل الشام أيّام
حربهم بصفّين إن ّ ي أكره لـكم أن تكونوا سبّابين ولـٰكنّكم لو وصفتم أعمالهم
وذ كرتم حالهم كان أصوب في القول وأبلغ في العذر وقلتم مكان سبّكم إيّاهم
ٱللّٰهمّ ٱحقن دماءنا ودماءهم وأصلح ّيغلا نع يوعرَ يو هلهج نَم ّقحلا فرعي ىّتح
مهتلالض نم مهدهٱو مهنيبو اننيب تاذ .هب جهَ ل نَم ناودعلاو al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
483 You rebuke me for a small matter and you're going to bring on much
more besides. Tell me---which rights have I deprived you of, what share
due to you have I withheld? Or which claim has been brought to me by any
Muslim that I have been too weak to deal with, or proved to be ignorant
about, or mistaken in handling? By God, I had no wish to assume the
caliphate and no interest in ruling. It was you who urged me and pleaded
with me to accept. And when the caliphate came to me, I looked to God's
Book for guidance, and to its ordi- nances and commandments for
governance, and followed its path. I looked to the Prophet's Sunnah and
emulated his example. I had no need of your opinion or the opinion of
any other, there was no ruling I was uncertain about such that I needed
to consult you or any of my Muslim brethren. Had I needed advice, I
would not have held back from you or anyone else. My equal distribution
of treasury funds is a matter neither of personal decision nor whim, but
I have found this---and you know it too---to be the ruling brought and
decided by God's Messenger. I did not need your help in deciding the
manner of distribu- tion that God had already set forth, that he already
ruled on. By God, neither you nor anyone else has grounds to reproach
me! May God guide your hearts and mine to right and move me and you to
have patience in adversity. Then ʿAlī said: May God have mercy on the
man who supports right when he sees it and repu- diates wrong when he
sees it, who courageously supports right against those who promote
wrong. 1.204 From an address by ʿAlī when he heard some of his
supporters cursing the Syri- ans during the conflict at Ṣiffīn:1 I don't
like you to curse! Rather, describe their deeds and define their
situation, that is a more judicious way of speaking and more convincing.
Instead of curs- ing, it's better for you to say this: "God, preserve
our blood and theirs from being spilled, reconcile us, guide them out of
their error until the ignorant recognize right and those enamored of
deception and enmity retreat from their unrigh- teous ways." 1 In
37/657, in Kufa, just before ʿAlī set out to fight the Syrians. The
supporters are Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī and ʿAmr ibn al-Ḥamiq al-Khuzāʿī. Minqarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 102--103. Note that this event took place before the
Battle of Ṣiffīn, when ʿAlī was still hopeful of persuading the Syrians
to pledge allegiance to him; moreover, he is forbidding his followers
from cursing the Syrians generally. As for Muʿāwiyah, ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ,
and even his own disloyal arbiter, Abū Mūsā al- Ashʿarī, ʿAlī himself is
later said to have regularly cursed them and four others of Muʿāwiyah's
commanders after each prayer. Ibid., 552. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 484 Text
and Translation
1.205وقالعليهالسلامفيبعضأيّامصفّينوقدرأىالحسنعليهالسلاميتسرّعإلىالحرب
اِمْلـِكُوا عنّي هذا الغلام لا يَه ُ دّني فإن ّ ي أَنْفَس ُ بهٰذين )يعني الحسن
والحسين عليهما السلام( على الموت لئلّا ينقطع بهما نسل رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله. قوله عليه السلام ⟩املـكوا عنّي هذا الغلام⟨من أعلى الكلام
وأفصحه. 1.206ةموكحلا رمأ يف هباحصأ هيلع برطضٱ اّ مل هلاق مالسلا هيلع هل
مالك نمو أيّها الناس إنّه لم يزل أمري معكم على ما أحب ّ حتّى نَه ِ كتكم
الحرب لقد والله أخذت منكموتركتوهيلعدوّكمأَنْه َ
ك.لقدكنتأمسأميرًافأصبحتاليوممأمورًاوكنت
.نوهركتامىلعمكـلمحأنأيلسيلوءاقبلامتببحأدقواً ّيهنَممويلاتحبصأفاً يهانسمأ
1.207ومن كلام له عليه السلام بالبصرة وقد دخل على العلاء بن زياد الحارثيّ
يعوده وهو من أصحابه فلمّا رأى سعة داره قال 1.207.1ما كنت تصنع بسعة هذه
الدار في الدنيا ما أنت إليها في الآخرةكنت أحوج ٰ لَ بو ىإنشئت َ بلغت َ
بهاالآخرةت َ قريفيهاالضيفوتصلفيهاالرحموت ُ طلعمنهاالحقوق مطالعها فإذا
أنت قد بلغت بها الآخرة. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
485 1.205 From an address by ʿAlī on one of the battle-days of Ṣiffīn,
when he saw Ḥasan rushing into the fray:1 Help me! Restrain this lad!
Don't let him crush my hopes! I am determined to protect both (meaning
Ḥasan and Ḥusayn) from death, so that the Messenger's line doesn't end
here! Raḍī: ʿAlī's expression, "Help me! Restrain this lad! (imlikū
ʿannī hādhā l-ghulām)" is among the most sublime and eloquent of words.
1.206 From an address ʿAlī delivered when his supporters disagreed with
him in the matter of the arbitration:2 People!You have followed my
command as I have wished thus far, but now war- fare has worn you out.
By God, it has indeed taken some and left some, but it has depleted your
enemy more than you!Yesterday I was your commander, and today you
command me. Yesterday I was the one who forbade you, and today you
forbid me.You want to live, and I have no way of convincing you to do
what you are dead set against. 1.207 From an address by ʿAlī in Basra.
ʿAlī went to visit ʿAlāʾ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī, one of his supporters who
was ill; when ʿAlī saw the size of the house, he said:3 1.207.1 What
will you do with this large house here in this world?You will have more
need of it in the hereafter! And yes, if you wish, you can take it with
you. Offer hospitality in it to guests, use it to foster ties with kin,
and pay your dues on it as they accrue. If you do all this, you will
take it with you to the here- after. 1 In 36--37/657. For events before
and after, see Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 529--530. 2 This was at Ṣiffīn in
37/657.The battle was going in ʿAlī's favor when Muʿāwiyah---after
earlier having rebuffed ʿAlī's efforts at negotiation---held aloft
Qurʾan leaves attached to spears and asked for arbitration. ʿAlī
believed this to be a ruse and urged his supporters to continue fight-
ing, but there were many who insisted he accept. Some details in
Ḥ11:29--31; text and further context in Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 484. 3
In 36/656, following the Battle of the Camel (Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 243). Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ11:37) says the man was named Rabīʿ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī
(cf. the same anecdote in Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 384, which also has Rabīʿ),
and that the name ʿAlāʾ is an error. Rabīʿ was a Companion of the
Prophet, who was a commander during the conquest of Khurasan and served
as gover- nor of Bahrain during ʿUmar's caliphate. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd says
this anecdote about Rabīʿ and ʿAlī is well known, while ʿAlāʾ is not
mentioned elsewhere in the sources. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 486 Text
and Translation 1.207.2فقال له العلاء يا أمير المؤمنين أشكو إليك أخي
عاصم بن زياد قال وما له قال لبس العباء وتخل ّ ى من الدنيا قال عل َ يّبه.
فلمّا جاء قال يا ع ُ دَي ّ نفسه لقد ٱستهام بك الخبيث أما رحمت َ أهلك وولدك
أترى الله أحلّ لك الطيّبات وهو يكره أن تأخذها أنت أهون على الله من ذلك.
قال يا أمير المؤمنين هذا أنت في خشونة ملبسك وجشوبة مأكلك. قال وَيح َ ك إن
ّ ي لست كأنت إنّ الله فرض على أئمّة الحقّ ١ أن يقدّروا أنفسهم بضَعَفة الناس كي
لا يتبيّغ بالفقير فقره. 1.208ومن كلام له عليه السلام وقد سأله سائل عن
أحاديث البِدَع وعمّا في أيدي الناس من ٱختلاف الخـبر فقال ً لطابو ا ً ّقح
سانلا يديأ يف ّنإ و اً قدصو ا اً مكحمو ا ً ّصاخو ا ً ّماعو اًخوسنمو اً خسانو
اًبذك ّ لص هللا لوسر ىلع بذُك دقو اً مهوو اًظفحو اً هباشتمو ى الله عليه وآله
على عهده حتّى لاقف اً بيطخ ماق ⟨ َ بَ تَ يْلَ ف اًدّمعتم ّيلع بذك نم رانلا نم
هدعقم ْأَ ّو .⟩ وإنّما أتاك بالحديث أربعةرجالليسلهمخامس .
رجلمنافقمظهرللإيمانمتصنّعبالإسلاملايتأثّمولا يتحرّج يكذب على رسول الله صل ّ
ى الله عليه وآله متعمّدًا فلو علم الناس أنّه منافق كاذب هنعفِقَ
لوهنمعمسوهآرهللالوسربحاصاولاقمهّنكٰـلوهلوقاوقّدصيملوهنماولبقيمل فيأخذون
بقوله وقد أخبرك الله عن المنافقين بما أخبرك ووصفهم بما وصفهم به لك ثمّ
١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩العدل⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 487 1.207.2 ʿAlāʾ then said to ʿAlī, "Commander of the
Faithful, I have a complaint against my brother ʿĀṣim ibn Ziyād." ʿAlī
asked, "What is your problem with him?" and ʿAlāʾ replied, "He has
donned a striped cloak of haircloth and renounced the world." ʿAlī
instructed, "Bring him to me!" and when ʿĀṣim was brought before him,
ʿAlī berated him: O self-hater, the evil one has befuddled you! Do you
feel no compassion toward your wife and children? Do you think that God
has made licit for you the good things of this world when he did not
want you to partake of them? Are you so important to God that he should
trouble with all that! Raḍī: ʿĀṣim replied, "But, Commander of the
Faithful, here you stand with your rough clothing and coarse food!" and
ʿAlī exclaimed: Good grief! Our situations are not the same. God has
mandated for true leaders that they should measure themselves against
the needy so that the poor are not crushed by their penury. 1.208 From
an address by ʿAlī responding to a man who asked him about invented
hadith and contrary reports current among people. He said:1 Reports
current among people today include both the right and the wrong, the
true and the false, the abrogating and the abrogated, the general and
the specific, the clear and the ambiguous, and the accurate and the
flawed. People attributed things falsely to the Messenger even when he
was alive, until finally he stood up to orate and declared, ⟨Whoever
deliberately misattributes some- thing to me will take possession of a
seat in hellfire⟩. There are four kinds of men who come to you with
hadith, there is no fifth after them: The first is the hypocrite who
makes a show of faith and pretends to be a Muslim. He neither fears
sinning nor hesitates to commit an act of wickedness, and he
deliberately misattributes words to God's Messenger. If people knew that
he is a lying hyp- ocrite, they would not accept the report from him or
believe his words, but
insteadtheysay,"ThisistheMessenger'sCompanion,whosawhim,heardfrom him,
and took from him," and so they accept his words.You know what God has 1
Presumably in Kufa, during the years of ʿAlī's caliphate,
35--40/656--661. The man is said to be Sulaym ibn Qays, who prefaced his
question to ʿAlī with the lines, "I have heard Salmān, Abū Dharr, and
Miqdād speak of certain things regarding exegesis of the Qurʾan, and
hadith and reports from God's Messenger, and I have heard you endorse
those. But there are many hadith and reports in people's hands that
contradict them ..." (text and context in Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 193--196). On
Sulaym, see Muḥammad Bāqir Anṣārī, "Lamḥah ʿan ḥayāt Sulaym wa- taʿrīkh
kitābihi," in the introduction to his edition of Kitāb Sulaym, 1:41--84.
Alternatively, the text is cited as an answer given during an oration in
the mosque in Basra, a few days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656
(Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 229). Other parts of the same oration, as cited in
ibid., 221--233, are listed in the note to §1.23. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 488 Text
and Translation ب َ قوا بعده عليه السلام فتقرّبوا إلى أئمّة الضلالة
والدعاة إلى النار بالزور والبهتان فوَل ّ وهم الأعمال وجعلوهم على رقاب
الناس وأكلوا بهم الدنيا وإنّما الناس مع الملوك والدنيا إلّا من عصم الله
فهذا أحد الأربعة. ورجل سمع من رسول الله صل ّ اً ئيش هلآو هيلع هللا ى لم
يحفظه على وجهه فوَهِمَ فيه ولم يتعمّد كَذِبًا فهو في يديه يرويه ويعمل به ويقول
أنا سمعته من رسول الله فلو علم المسلمون أنّه وَهِمَ فيه لم يقبلوه منه ولو
علم هو أنّهكذلك لرفضه.ورجلثالثسمعمنرسولاللهصل ّ وهوهنعىهنّمثهبرمأياً
ئيشهلآوهيلعهللاى لا يعلم أو سمعه ينهى عن شيء ثمّأمر به وهو لا يعلم فحفظ
المنسوخ ولم يحفظ الناسخ فلو يعلم أنّه منسوخ لرفضه ولو علم المسلمون إذ
سمعوه منه أنّه منسوخ لرفضوه. وآخر رابع لم ِ هَي ملو هللا لوسرل اًميظعتو هلل
اً فوخ بذكـلل ضغبم هلوسر ىلع الو هللا ىلع بذكي م بل حفظ ما سمع على وجهه
فجاء به على ما سمعه لم يزد فيه ولم ينقص منه وحفظ الناسخ فعمل به وحفظ
المنسوخ فجنّب عنه وعرف الخاص ّ والعامّ فوضع كلّ شيء موضعه وعرف المتشابه
ومحكمه. وقد كان يكون من رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله الكلام له وجهان
فكلام خاص ّ وكلام عامّ فيسمعه من لا يعرف ما عنى الله به ولا ما عنى به
رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فيحمله السامع ويوجّهه على غير معرفة
بمعناه وما ق ُ صد به وما خَرج من أجله. وليس كلّ أصحاب رسول الله كان يسأله
ويستفهمه حتّى إن كانوا ليحبّون أن يجيء الأعرابيّأو الطارئ فيسأله عليه
السلام حتّى يسمعوا. وكان لا يمرّبي من ذلك شيء إلّا سألت عنه وحفظته. فهذه
وجوه ما عليه الناس في ٱختلافهم وعللهم في رواياتهم. 1.209ومن خطبة له عليه
السلام وكان من ٱقتدار جبروته وبديع لطائف صنعته أن جعل من ماء اليَمّ ١
الزاخر المتراكِم َ بَ يفِصاقتملا تكسمتسٱفاهقاتترٱدعبتاوامسعبساهقتففاً
قابطأهنمرطفّمثاًدماجاًس ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ: ⟩البحر⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
489 said to you about hypocrites, you know how God has described them!
After the Messenger's death they persisted, seeking closeness with lies
and fabrications to false leaders and hell's advocates who made them
governors and gave them authority over people's necks---leaders who, in
turn, amassed wealth through them. Except for those whom God protects,
most people side with kings and choose the path of worldly benefit. This
is one of the four. The second is a man who has heard something from the
Messenger but has not retained it correctly, he errs but does not
deliberately lie. The report as he remembers it is in his hands, and he
narrates it and acts upon it, saying, "I heard this from God's Mes-
senger." The Muslims would not accept it from him if they knew that he
errs; he too would reject it if he knew. The third is a man who heard
the Messenger ordain something that he later forbade but does not know
this, or he heard the Messenger forbid something that he later ordained
but does not know this, he thus preserves the abrogated, but not the
abrogating, ruling. He himself would reject it if he knew it was
abrogated; the Muslims would reject it too if they knew it was
abrogated. The fourth is a man who never attributes words falsely to God
or to his Messenger. He fears God and reveres God's Messenger, and he
detests lies. He does not err and correctly preserves what he heard,
relating the report as he heard it without addition or omission. He
knows the abrogating ruling and acts upon it, and he knows the abrogated
act and stays away from it. He knows the specific and the general and
places everything in its proper place, he knows the ambiguous and the
clear. Indeed, the words the Messenger spoke were of two kinds, the
specific and the general. Many who heard them did not fully understand
what God or his Messenger had meant. These peo- ple narrated and
interpreted them in a particular way without understanding their real
meaning, or what the Messenger had intended in uttering them, or the
context in which he had spoken them. Not all the Messenger's Companions
questioned him and sought clarity, in fact, they used to hope that a
Bedouin or a stranger would turn up and inquire so that they could hear
the explana- tion. I, on the other hand, asked the Messenger about all
his utterances and remembered them correctly. These are the categories
of disagreement among the people, and the reasons for their varied
narrations. 1.209 From an oration by ʿAlī: Through his supreme power and
sublime and wondrous craftsmanship, God produced dry, solid earth from
the raging, crashing, ocean masses.1 He then divided the firmament into
layers and separated its mass into seven skies that held together
through his command and stood at the limit he had set.The skies 1 I have
inserted the word "earth," following Ḥ11:52; B 640; R 2:336--337.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 490 Text and
Translation نعذأوهرمأل ّلذدقرّخسملاماقْمَقلاورِجْنَعْثُ
ملارضخألااهلمحيهّدحىلعتماقوهرمأب لهيبتهووقفالجاريمنهلخشيتهوجَب َ
لَجَلاميدَهاونشوزَمتونهاوأطوادَهافأَرساهافي مَراسيها وألزمها قراراتها فمضت
رؤوسها في الهواء ورَسَب َ ت١ أصولها في الماء فأنهد جبالها عن سهولها وأَساخَ
قواعدها في متون أقطارها ومواضع أنصابها فأشهق قِلالها وأطال ديمت نأ نم
اهتكرح ىلع تنكسف اًداتوأ اهيف اه َ ّزَرَأو اًدامع ضرألل اهلعجو اهزاشنأ
بأهلها أو ت َ سيخ بحَملها أو تزول عن موضعها. فسبحان من أمسكها بعد مَوَجان
مِياهها وأجمدها بعد رطوبة أكنافها فجعلها لخلقه مهادًا وبسطها لهم فراشًا فوق
بحر لُج ِّيّ راكد لا يجري وقائم لا يسري ت ُ كَر يِف َ ّن ِإ﴿ فراوذلا مامغلا
هضَخمَ تو فصاوعلا حايرلا هرِك ذٰل ِ َ مِ لًةَرْبِعَ ل َك ن ْ يَخْش َ ى﴾. 1.210ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام ُ ملاو ةرئاجلا ريغ ةلداعلا انتلاقم عمس كدابع نم دبع
امُ ّيأ ّمهّٰللا صل ِ حة في الدين والدنيا غير المفسدة فأبى بعد سمعه لها إلّا
النكوص عن نصرتك والإبطاء عن إعزاز دينك فإنّا نستشهدك عليه يا أكبر
الشاهدين شهادة ونستشهد عليه جميع من أسكنته أرضك وسماواتك. ثمّأنت ب َ
.هبنذب هل ذخآلاو هرصن نع ينغُ ملاُدْع 1.211ومن خطبة له عليه السلام
الحمدللهالعليّعنشبهالمخلوقينالغالبلمقالالواصفينالظاهربعجائبتدبيرهللناظرين
الباطن بجلال عزّته عن فكر المتوهّمين العالم بلا ٱكتساب ولا ٱزدياد ولا علم
مستفاد المقدّر لجميع الأمور بلا رويّة ولا ضمير الذي لا تغشاه الظلَم ولا
يستضيء بالأنوار ولا يرهقه ليل ولا يجري عليه نهار ليس إدراكه بالأبصار ولا
علمه بالأخبار.٢ منها في ذ كر النبيّعليه السلام
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩ورَسَت ْ ⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي:بفتحالهمزة
وكسرهامعًافيكلمتي ⟩ابصار⟨و⟩اخبار⟨.ھ: ⟩بالإخبار⟨،ونسخة ⟩بالاختبار⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
491 were borne by the aquamarine depths, and those vast seas that
submitted to his command bowed in reverence and stilled their flow in
awe. He formed the earth's rocky crags and towering ridges and peaks,
anchoring and embedding them in the seabed until their summits rose high
in the firmament and their roots sank deep below the water's surface. He
elevated the mountains above its plains and sank its supports into the
backs of its far-reaching regions and land- marks, summits lofty and
pinnacles high, columns for the earth fixed inside it like pegs. The
earth became still. It no longer heaved or tossed around its
inhabitants, nor sank under their weight, nor shifted position. Glory to
him who stopped its movement after its waters had surged in billows, who
made it dry and solid after its regions had been covered in water! He
made it a cradle for his creatures and unfurled it like a carpet. He
settled it on still ocean depths that do not surge, a quiet sea that
does not flow, though it is whipped by blus- tery winds, and churned by
tempestuous clouds. «There is a lesson here for all who venerate God.»1
1.210 From an oration by ʿAlī:2
God!Iaskyou,Ogreatestwitness,tobearwitnessoveranyof yourservantswho hear
my words---words that are always just, never tyrannical, always
righteous, never corrupt---and, after hearing them, refuses to support
you and holds back from fighting for your religion. I ask all whom you
have housed upon your earth
andinyourskiestobearwitnessoverhim.AndGod,Iknowthatyouwillsuffice me
without his support and hold him accountable for his sin. 1.211 From an
oration by ʿAlī: Praise God---exalted beyond comparisons to created
beings, greater than the utterances of those who describe, manifest
through his wondrous planning to beholders, concealed in his majestic
might from thinkers, all-knowing without acquisition, increase, or
learning, ordainer of all affairs without reflection or thought.
Darkness does not cover him, lights do not illumine him, nights do not
torment him, and days do not fatigue him. His perception does not stem
from vision, his knowledge does not stem from reports. From the same
oration in praise of the Prophet: 1 Qurʾan, Nāziʿāt 79:26. 2 Presumably
in Kufa, between 37/658 and 40/661. B 640: "This is an excerpt from an
oration with which ʿAlī frequently urged his associates to muster
against the Syrians, delivered after most of them held back from
supporting him in the fight." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 492 Text and
Translation َ تَ رفءافطصالايفهمّدقوءايضلابهلسرأ قَ بهالم َ
ةبوعصلاهبلّلذوبلاغُ ملاهبرَواسوقتاف .لامشو نيمي نع لالضلا حّرس ىّتح ةنوزُ حلا
هب لّهسو 1.212ومن خطبة له عليه السلام وأشهد أنّه عدلٌ ع َ دَل وحَكَمٌ ف َ صَل
وأشهد أنّ محمّدًا عبده وسيّد عبادهكلّما نسخ الله هللا ّنإو الأ .رجاف هيف برض
الو رهاع هيف مِهسُ ي مل امهريخ يف هلعج نيتقرف قلخلا جعل للخير أهل ً ا
وللحقّ دعائم وللطاعة عِصَمًا وإنّ لـكم عند كلّ طاعة عونًا من الله
يقولعلىالألسنةويثبّتالأفئدةفيهكفاءلمكتف ٍ وشفاءلمشتف ٍ .وٱعلمواأنّ
عبادالله المستحفَظين علمه يصونون مصونه ويفجّرون عيونه يتواصلون بالولاية
ويتلاق َ ون بالمحبّة َ قاستَ يو كلذىلعةبيِغلامهيفعرستالوةبيرلامهبوشتالةَ ّيِرِ
بنوردصيوةّيورسأكبنو َ بلالضافتكاوناكفنولصاوتيهبونوُ
ّباحتيهيلعفمهقالخأومهقلخدقع ذخؤيفىقتنُ يرذ َ يْلَ
ف.صيحمتلاهبّذهوصيلختلاهزّيمدقىقليوهنم قْب َ لٱمرؤكرامةبقبولهاوليحذرقارعة
قبل حلولها ولينظر ٱمرؤ في قصير أيّامه وقليل مقامه في منزل حتّى يستبدل به
منزلًا نم بّنجتو هيدهي نم عاطأ ميلس بلق يذل ىبوطف .هلَقتنم فراعمو هلَ ّوحتمل
عنصيلف نأ لبق ىدهلا ردابو هرمأ ٍداه ةعاطو هرّصب نم رصبب ةمالسلا ليبس
باصأو هيدرُ ي يدهو قيرطلا ىلع ميقأ دقف ةبوَ حلا طامأو ةبوتلا حتفتسٱو
هبابسأ عطقتو هباوبأ قلغت نهج السبيل. 1.213ومن دعائه عليه السلام
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
493 God sent him with light and precedence among his select. Through
him, God repaired torn ties, fought off powerful enemies, made the
unruly tractable, and smoothed rough ground---until he had dispelled
error from the right and from the left. 1.212 From an oration by ʿAlī:1
I testify that God is the fount of justice who always gives justice, the
judge whose judgment is final. I testify that Muḥammad is his servant,
and the chief among his servants. Whenever God divided a blood line into
two, he placed Muḥammad in the best line; no fornicator ever had a share
in producing him, nor an adulterer any part. Harken to me! God has
created upholders of good, pillars of right, and guardians for acts of
obedience. When you perform an act of obedience, you will find that
God's aid speaks to you through people's tongues and makes your hearts
steadfast---God's aid suffices those who rely on it and cures those who
seek to be cured. Know this: Those whom God has entrusted with
preserving his knowledge protect its fortifications, pour forth its
streams, associate with each other in loyalty, meet each other with
affection, offer each other refreshing cups, and leave the waterhole
with their thirst quenched; doubts never plague them and backbiting
never gains trac- tion. God has bound their bodies and their character
to this holy way of being, and they love each other and foster mutual
regard. They are like high qual- ity grain used for planting: first it
is sorted, and the best---distinguished by purity and refined by
fire---is picked out and sown into the ploughed earth. Let each man
among you secure honor by adopting this counsel! Let him fear the great
calamity before it descends! Let each man reflect on the short- ness of
his days, on the brevity of his stay, in this abode that he will soon
exchange for another! Let him prepare for the journey and watch for the
signs of the exodus! Blessed is the person who possesses a sound heart,
obeys his guide, and shuns his destroyer, who finds the road to security
through the sight bestowed on him by his teacher and obedience to the
commands of his guide, who hastens to attain guidance before its doors
close and its ropes sever, who knocks on the door of forgiveness and
repulses sin! Such a per- son has been placed on the right path. He has
been guided to the straight road. 1.213 From a supplication by ʿAlī: 1
Raḍī transcribes this text among ʿAlī's orations, but Ibn Ṭāwūs (Kashf,
189--192) cites it as part of a letter, which he says ʿAlī "wrote to one
of his eminent companions." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 494 Text and
Translation الحمد الله الذي لم ي ُ اًذوخأم الو ءوسب يقورُع ىلع اًبورضم الو
اًميقس الو اً تّيم يب حبص ّ برل اً ركنم الو ينيد نع ا ً ّدترم الو يرباد
اًعوطقم الو يلمع أوسأب ي ولا مستوحشًا من اً ملاظ اًكولمم اًدبع تحبصأ .يلبق نم
ممألا باذعب اًب َ ّذعم الو يلقع اًسِبتلم الو يناميإ لنفسي لك الحجّة عليّ ولا
حجّة لي لا أستطيع أن آخذ إلّا ما أعطيتني ولا أتّقي إلّا ما ّ نإ ّمهّٰللا .ينتْيَ
قَو ي أعوذ بك أن أفتقر في غناك أو أضلّ في هداك أو أَضامَفي سلطانك أو أُضطهد
والأمر لك. اللّٰهمّ ٱجعل نفسي أوّل كريمة تنتزعها من كرائمي وأوّل وديعة
ترتجعها من ودائع نعمك عندي. اللّٰهمّ إنّا نعوذ بك أن نذهب عن قولك أو نفتتن
عن دينك أو تَتاي َ عَ بنا أهواؤنا دون الهدى الذي جاء من عندك. 1.214ومن
خطبة له عليه السلام بصفّين 1.214.1رمأ ةيالوب ا ً ّقح مكيلع يل هللا لعج
دقف .دعب اّمأ كم ولـكم عليّمن الحقّ مثل الذي عليكمفالحقّ
أوسعالأشياءفيالتواصفوأضيقهافيالتناصفلايجريلأحدإلّاجرى عليه ولا يجري عليه
إلّا جرى له ولو كان لأحد أن يجري له ولا يجري عليه لكان ذلك خالصًا لله
سبحانه دون خلقه لقدرته على عباده ولعدله في كلّ ما جرت عليه صروف قضائه
ولـكنّه جعل حقّه على العباد أن يطيعوه وجعل جزاءهم عليه مُضاعفة الثواب تفضّل
ً ا منه وتوسّعًا بما هو من المزيد أهله. أفاكتت اهلعجف ضعب ىلع سانلا ضعبل
اهضرتفٱ اً قوقح هقوقح نم هناحبس لعجّمث في وجوهها ويوجب بعضها بعضًا ولا ي ُ
ستوجب بعضُها إلّا ببعض وأعظم ما ٱفترض al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 495 Praise God who brought me to this morning alive and
healthy with no leprosy in my veins,1 not seized for my worst deeds, or
with my line of descendants severed, or an apostate from my religion, or
a denier of my Lord, or estranged from my faith, or with my mind
confused, or punished with the punishment meted out to nations before
me. God! I have come into this morning your ser- vant and bondsman, one
who has oppressed his own soul.You have established
yourcaseagainstme,whileIhavenocasetoofferyou.Icantakenothingexcept what
you give me, I can protect myself against nothing except what you pro-
tect me against. God! I seek refuge in you! Let me not be poor when you
possess riches. Let me not stray when you are the guide. Let me not be
assaulted in the domain of your authority. Let me not be persecuted when
you are the one who commands. God! Of all the precious faculties I
possess, let my spirit be the first thing you wrest from me. Of all the
blessings you have given me in trust, let it be the first deposit you
ask to be returned. God! We seek refuge in you! Do not let us forsake
your word or be lured away from your religion. Do not let our pas- sions
rush us headlong into evil, rather than being led by the guidance that
has come from you. 1.214 From an oration by ʿAlī at Ṣiffīn:2 1.214.1
Godhasgivenmerightsoveryoubyplacingmeinchargeof youraffairs, and you
have rights over me, just as I have over you. Rights are the broadest of
things in the scope of their delineation, but the narrowest in terms of
equi- table application. They are never credited to any individual
except that they can also be credited against him, and they are likewise
never credited against himexceptthattheycanalsobecreditedtohim.If
itwerepossibleforanybeing to have rights credited to but not against
him, that position would be reserved for Almighty God alone; it would
not apply to any of his creatures because he is all-powerful over his
servants and always just in enacting his decrees. But God made it his
right over his servants that they obey him, while also making it
incumbent upon himself to recompense them with manifold reward through
the abundant generosity and expansive bounty only he can bestow. Then,
as part of God's own rights, he mandated rights for some people over
others. He balanced these rights in their various aspects, making some
entail others, and some not be entailed except by others. The greatest
of his man- dated rights are those of the ruler over his subjects and
those of subjects over 1 Ar. sūʾ, lit. "with my veins being hit with
evil," translation based on Ḥ11:85, who says that "evil" was a euphemism
for "leprosy" (baraṣ). 2 In 37/657. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 496 Text
and Translation سبحانهمنتلكالحقوقحقّ الواليعلىالرعيّةوحقّ
الرعيّةعلىالواليفريضةفرضهاالله حالصباّلإةّيعرلاحلصتتسيلفمهنيدلا ً
ّزعومهتفلألاًماظناهلعجف ٍّلكىلع ٍّلكلهناحبس الولاة ولا تصلح الولاة إلّا
بٱستقامة الرعيّة. فإذا أدّت الرعيّة إلى الوالي حقّه وأدّى الوالي إليها حقّها
عزّ الحقّ بينهم وقامت مناهج الدين وٱعتدلت معالم العدل وجرت على أذلالها
السنن فصلح بذلك الزمان وطُمع في بقاء الدولة ويئست مطامع الأعداء. وإذا
غلبت الرعيّة واليَها أو أجحف الوالي برعيّته ٱختلفت هنالك الكلمة وظهرت معالم
ماكحألا تلّطُعو ىوهلاب لمُعف ننسلا ّجاحَم تكرُ تو نيدلا يف لاغدإلا ترثكو
روجلا وكثرت علل النفوس فلا ي ُ ستوحش لعظيم حقّ عُطّل ولا لعظيم باطل ف ُ عل
فهنالك تذلّ الأبرار وتعزّالأشرار وتعظم تَب ِ عات الله عند العباد. فعليكم
بالتناصح في ذلك وحسن التعاون عليه فليس أحد وإن ٱشتدّ على رضى الله حرصه
وطال في العمل ٱجتهاده ببالغ حقيقة ما الله أهله من الطاعة له ولـكنّ من
واجب حقوق الله على العباد النصيحة بمبلغ جهدهم والتعاون على إقامة الحقّ
بينهم. وليس ٱمرؤ وإن عظمت في الحقّ منزلته وتقدّمت في الدين فضيلته ب ِ فَوقِ
أن يعان على ماحمّلهاللهمنحقّهولاٱمرؤوإنصغّرتهالنفوسوٱقتحمتهالعيونب ِ دُونِ
أنيعينعلى ذلك أو يعان عليه.
1.214.2فأجابهرجلمنأصحابهبكلامطويليكثرفيهالثناءعليهويذ كرسمعهوطاعتهلهفقال
عليه السلام إنّ من حقّ من عظم جلال الله في نفسه وجلّ موضعه من قلبه أن يصغر
عنده لعظم فطلو هيلع هللا ةمعن تمظع ْنَمَ ل كلذك ناك نم ّقحأ ّنإو هاوس ام
ّلك كلذ إحسانه إليه فإنّه لم تعظم نعمة الله على أحد إلّا ٱزداد حقّ الله
عليه عُظْمًا. وإنّ من أسخف حالات الولاة عند صالح الناس أن ي ُ ظَنّ بهم حب ىلع
مهرمأ عضويو رخفلا ُ ّ الـكبر وقد كرهت ُ أن يكون جالَ في ظنّكم أن ّ ي أحب ّ
الإطراء وٱستماع الثناء ولست بحمد الله كذلك ولو كنت أحب ّ أن يقال ذاك
لتركته ٱنحطاطًا لله سبحانه عن تناول al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
497 their ruler. This is a duty that God has mandated for everyone over
everyone, in a system that generates mutual regard and strengthens
Islam. For subjects will not be righteous except when their ruler is
righteous, and a ruler will not be righteous except when his subjects
are steadfast. If subjects render the ruler his rights and the ruler
renders them theirs, truth will become strong, the ways of religion will
be established, the waymarks of justice will be fixed, and the road of
the Sunnah will become easy to follow. Thereby, the age will become
virtuous, the state can be expected to remain stable, and its enemies'
ambi- tions will be thwarted. But if subjects overpower their ruler, or
if the ruler overburdens his subjects, voices will be divided,
oppression will rage, religious corruption will increase, and the
straight road will be abandoned. Then, pas- sions will drive actions,
rules will be forsaken, and hearts will become diseased. People will
cease to be outraged even when essential rights are abandoned, or great
injustices perpetrated. In that moment, the pious will be shamed and the
evil honored, and God will afflict his servants with great punishments.
People, counsel one another in this matter and help one another as you
should. No one, no matter how strong his wish to secure God's pleasure,
or how far-reaching his efforts in doing good, is capable of rendering
to God the obe- dience that is truly his due. God has mandated as a
right for himself over his servants that they counsel one another as
much as they are able, and help one another in establishing what is
proper. No man, no matter how great his sta- tion in truth, or how
superior his precedence in religion, is above needing help in
establishing God's charge. And no man, no matter how servile people
might think him, or how humble he may appear to their eyes, is too lowly
to help in this, or to be helped. 1.214.2 One of ʿAlī's associates
responded with a long speech, in which he praised ʿAlī profusely and
declared that he would hear and obey,1 to which ʿAlī countered: Those
who feel God's majesty in their souls and his grandeur in their hearts
should find all else insignificant by comparison; those who have
received his great blessings and sublime favors should be the most
assiduous in this regard, for when God's blessings for a person
increase, God's rights over him also increase. The pious would say that
it is the most foolish rulers who crave acclaim and who ground their
authority in pride, so I am mortified that you thought your adulation
and praise would please me. But, by God's grace, I am notthat man.Evenif
Ihadrelishedthatkindof speech,Iwouldhavesetitaside in submission to God,
not daring to stretch my hand toward that greatness and 1 Text of the
man's full speech reported by Kulaynī, Kāfī, 5:352. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 498 Text
and Translation اونثُ ت الف ءالبلا دعب ءانثلا سانلا ىلحتسٱ امّبرو
.ءايربكـلاو ةمظعلا نم هب ّقحأ وه ام عليّ بجميل ثناء لإخراجي نفسي إلى الله
وإليكم من البقيّة١ في حقوق لم أفرغ من أدائها وفرائض لا بدّ من إمضائها. فلا
تكلّموني بما ت ُ ُ ي امب يّنم اوظّفحتت الو ةربابجلا هب مَ ّلك هب ظ َ ّفحت
عند أهل البادرة ولا تخالطوني بالم ُ صانعة ولا تظنّوا بي ٱستثقالًا لحقّ قيل
لي ولا ٱلتماس إعظام لنفسي فإنّه من ٱستثقل الحقّ أن يقال له أو العدل أن
يعرض عليهكان العمل بهما عليه أثقل. فلا تكفّوا عن مقالة بحقّ أو مشورة بعدل
فإن ّ ي لست في نفسي ب ِ فَوْقِ أن أخطئ ولا آمن ذاك من فعلي إلّا أن يكفي الله
من نفسي ما هو أملك به منّي. فإنّما أنا وأنتم عبيد مملوكون لرب ّ لا رب اّ نك
اّمم انجرخأو انسفنأ نم كلمن ال ام اّنم كلمي هريغ ّ فيه إلى ما صلحنا عليه
فأبدلنا بعد الضلالة بالهدى وأعطانا البصيرة بعد العمى. 1.215ومن كلام له
عليه السلام 1.215.1اللّٰهمّ إن ّ
يأستعديكعلىقريشفإنّهمقدقطعوارحميوكَفَؤواإنائيوأجمعواعلى نأ ّقحلا يفو هذخأت
نأ ّقحلا يف ّنإ الأ اولاقو يريغ نم هب ىلوأ تنك ا ً ّقح يتعزانم تُم وأ
اًمومغم ربصٱف هعنمُ ت ْ متأسّفًا. فنظرت ُ فإذا ليس لي رافد ولا ذاب ّ ولا
مساعد إلّا أهل بيتي فضننت بهم عن المنيّة فأغضيت على القذى وجرعت ريقي على
الشجى .رافِّشلا ّزَح نم بلقلل مَ لآو مَقْلَعلا نم ّرَمأ ىلع ظيغلا مظك نم تربصو
وقد مضى هذا الكلام في أثناء خطبة متقدّمة إلّا أن ّ ي كرّرته هٰهنا لٱختلاف
الروايتين. ١م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩التقيّة⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
499 glory of which he is far worthier than I. It may be that some people
do find praise sweet after achieving an intensely contested victory, but
don't shower me with praise just yet for having fought in God's cause
and yours---I still have many obligations to discharge and many
requirements to fulfill. Don't address me as you would tyrants,don'tbe
waryof me as youwouldthose quick toanger, don't try to influence me with
flattery. Don't think, moreover, that I should be pained by a word
spoken to me in truth, or that I should think myself above it. Anyone
who finds the truth painful to hear, who is angered when presented with
a sound opinion, will find action even harder. Don't hold back from
telling me the truth or offering good counsel, for I don't consider
myself above error,1 nor do I count myself safe in my actions, except
that God, who has the power to do so, will save me, I know. You and I
are his slaves and bondsmen, there is no Lord other than he---he owns us
more surely than we own ourselves. He brought us out from where we were
to a better place, replacing our error with guidance, and our blindness
with sight. 1.215 From an address by ʿAlī:2 1.215.1
God!IaskyourhelpagainsttheQuraysh!Theyhaveseveredmykinship, upended my
vessels, and banded together to wrest from me a right that I have always
been worthier of than any other. They mocked, "A right may be taken, and
a right may also be denied, so bear your grief, or die lamenting!" I
looked around and saw no supporter, no protector, no helper other than
my own fam- ily, and I chose to save them from sure death. I closed my
eyes tight against the dust, choked on my saliva, and swallowed my
anger, in a state that was more bitter than colocynth and caused my
heart more anguish than a knife wound. Raḍī: These lines were seen in an
earlier oration---I have repeated them here because some language is
different.3 1 The Shiʿi commentators see this line as evidence of ʿAlī's
humility (R 2:357; B 650). The Sunni commentator interprets it as an
admission of fallibility (Ḥ11:107--108). 2 Some sources transcribe this
text as part of an epistle ʿAlī sent to be read out in public to his
supporters following ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ's killing of Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr
in Egypt in 38/658 (Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 1:302, 308, 311; IbnṬāwūs, Kashf,
174, 180). It refers to the succession after the
Prophet'sdeathin11/632andalsototheShūrāCouncilthatappointedʿUthmānin23/644.The
text could have been first delivered as an oration, then transcribed and
disseminated as an epistle. It could also be that the historians are
unsure about the genre because excerpts from orations and epistles from
the early period are stylistically quite similar. See discussion of this
similarity in Qutbuddin, Arabic Oration, 416--419. 3 First half of
§1.215.1 in §1.170.3, second half in §1.26.2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 500 Text
and Translation 1.215.2ومنه في ذ كر السائرين إلى البصرة لحربه فقدموا على
عمّالي وخزّان مال المسلمين الذي في يدي وعلى أهل مصر كلّهم في طاعتي وعلى
بيعتي فشتّتوا كلمتهم وأفسدوا عليّ جماعتهم ووَثَبوا على شيعتي فقتلوا طائفة
منهم غدرًا وطائفة عضّوا على أسيافهم فضاربوا بها حتّى لقوا الله صادقين.
1.216ناليتق امهو ديسَأ نب باّتَع نب نامحرلا دبعو ةحلطب ّرم اّ مل مالسلا هيلع
هل مالك نمو يوم الجمل لقد أصبح أبو محمّد بهذا المكان غريبًا أما والله لقد
كنت أكره أن تكون قريش قتلى تحت بطون الـكواكب أدركت وِتري من بني عبد مناف
وأفلتتني أعنان١ بني جُم َ ح. لقد أَتْل َ عوا أعناقهم إلى أمر لم يكونوا أهله
فوُقِصوا دونه. 1.217ومن كلام له عليه السلام قد أحيا عقله وأمات نفسه حتّى دَق
قربلا ريثك عمال هل قَرَ بو هظيلغ فطلو هليلج َ ّ فأبان له الطريق وسلك به
السبيل وتدافعته الأبواب إلى باب السلامة ودار الإقامة وثبتت رجلاه
بطمأنينة بدنه في قرار الأمن والراحة بما ٱستعمل قلبه وأرضى ربّه. 1.218ىَ
ّتَحُرُ ثاَكَ ّتلاُمُكاَ هْلَأ﴿ هتوالت دعب مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو ٰ ﴾َرِ باَقَمْلاُ
مُتْرُز ١ن، ش، ي، ومص ّ ححة في ھ: كذا. م، وأصل ھ، ومصحّحة في ش، ونسخة في ي
مع تعليق معًا: ⟩أعيان⟨.ونسخةأخرىفيھ: ⟩أغيار⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 501 1.215.2 From the same address, describing those who
marched to Basra to fight him:1 They advanced against my governors in
Basra and the custodians of the public treasury under my jurisdiction,
and against others among the townspeople--- all bound to my obedience
and pledged to my allegiance---creating divi- sion and fragmenting their
unity. They attacked my followers, killing a group of them through
treachery, while another group of loyalists gripped their swords and
exchanged blows until they met God, having fought with true courage.
1.216 From words that ʿAlī spoke when he passed by the corpses of Ṭalḥah
and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAttāb ibn Asīd, who had been slain during the
Battle of the Camel:2 Abū Muḥammad sleeps here this morning, an exile
from his home! By God, I am grieved that the Quraysh should lie slain
under the stars! The chieftains of Jumaḥhave escaped my grasp, but I
have obtained my revenge against the clan of ʿAbd Manāf.Their necks
strained after a position that did not belong to them and they were
broken. 1.217 From an address by ʿAlī: This man resuscitated his
intellect and killed his sentient soul, until his body became emaciated
and his frame became slight. Lightning shone in a brilliant flash that
illuminated the road for him and showed the way. Doors opened before
him, one after another, until they conveyed him to the door of safety
and the abode of permanence. His feet stood firm, his body serene, in
the sta- ble earth of security and comfort. All this because he engaged
his heart in good and pleased his Lord. 1.218 From an address by ʿAlī
upon reciting, «You are obsessed with gathering more and more until you
visit your graves.»3 1 Some lines of §1.215.2 also in §1.170.3. 2
Outside Basra, in 36/656. Abū Muḥammad is Ṭalḥah. ʿAbd Manāf---to which
ʿAlī's and the Prophet Muḥammad's clan of Hāshim also belonged---was a
sub-tribe of the Quraysh. At the Battle of the Camel, the ʿAbd Manāf
clansmen killed fighting ʿAlī included ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAttāb, from
the clan of Umayyah (Ḥ11:123--124); Ṭalḥah and Zubayr---from the clans
of Taym and Asad respectively---were also descended from ʿAbd Manāf on
their mothers' side (B 652). Jumaḥwas another sub-tribe of Quraysh, and,
although some of its chieftains were killed, others, including ʿAbdallāh
ibn Ṣafwān and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Ṣafwān, fled; Marwān ibn Ḥakam, also
from Jumaḥ, was captured and pardoned (B 652; Ḥ11:125; see also §1.70).
3 Qurʾan, Takāthur 102:1--2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 502 Text and
Translation 1.218.1يأ مهنم اولختسٱ دقل هعظفأ ام اً رطخو هلفغأ ام اًرْوَزو
هدعبأ ام اًمارَم هلاي ّ مُذ نورثاكتي ىكـلَ هلا ديدعب مأ نورخفي مهئابآ
عراصمبفأ ديعب ناكم نم مهوشوانتو رِّك اونوكي نأ نم ّقحأ اًرَ بِع اونوكي نألو
تنكس تاكرحو تَوَخ اًداسجأ مهنم نوعجتري بانجمهباوطبهينألواً رَختفُم َ ذل ّ
ةأحجىمنأنيقوموابهممقامعزّة.لقدنظرواإليهم بأبصار العَشوة وضربوا منهم في
غمرة جهالة١ ولو ٱستنطقوا عنهم عَرَصات تلك الديار الخاوية والربوع٢ الخالية
لقالت ذهبوا في الأرض ضُلّالًا وذهبتم في أعقابهم جهّالًا اوبّرخ اميف نونكستو
اوظِفَ ل اميف نوعترتو مهداسجأ يف ٣نوتبنتستو مهِماه يف نوؤطت .مكيلعُحئاوَ نو
ٍكاوَ ب مهنيبو مكنيب ماّيألا امّنإو 1.218.2تابَ لَحو ّزعلا مواقم مهل تناك
نيذلا مكـلهانم طاّرُ فو مكتياغ فلس كئلوأ ً ليبس خزرَ بلا نوطب يف اوكـلس .اً
قَوُسو اًكولم رخفلا ا سُلّطت الأرض عليهم فيه فأكلت ال اًرامِضو نوّمِ نَ ي ال اًدامج
مهروبق تاوجف يف اوحبصأف مهئامد نم تبرشو مهموحل نم يوجدون لا يفزعهم ورود
الأهوال ولا يحزنهم تنكّر الأحوال ولا يحفلون بالرواجف اوتّتشتف اًعيمج اوناك
امّنإو نورضحَي ال اًدوهشو نورظتنُ ي ال اً بّيُغ فصاوقلل نونذأي الو مهرايد تّمَصو
مهرابخأ تيمع مهّلحم دعب الو مهدهع لوط نع امو .اوقرتفٱف اً فاّلُأو ولـكنّهم
سُقوا كأسًا بدّلتهم بالنطق خَرَسًا وبالسمع صممًا وبالحركات سكونًا فكأنّهم في
ٱرتجال٤ الصفة صرعى سُبات جيران لا يتأن ّ َ يِ لَ ب نوروازتي ال ءاّبحأو نوس ت
بينهم عُرىالتعارفوٱنقطعتمنهمأسبابالإخاءفكلّهموحيدوهمجميعوبجانبالهجر وهم
أخلّاء لا يتعارفون لليل صباحًا ولا لنهار مساء. أي ّ الجديدين ظعنوا فيهكان
عليهم سرمدًاشاهدوامنأخطاردارهمأفظعممّاخافواورأوامنآياتهاأعظمممّاقدّروافكِلا
الغايتين مُدّت لهم إلى مَباءة فاتت مبالغ الخوف٥ والرجاء.
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ:سقطت ⟩جهالة⟨. ٢ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا. م: ⟩الرسوم⟨.
٣م، ھ، ومصحّحة في ش، ن: كذا. ي، وأصل ش، ن: ⟩تستثبتون⟨. ٤ش، م، ي، ھ: كذا.
ن، ونسخة في ش: ⟩ٱرتحال⟨. ٥م، ش، ي، ومصحّحة في ن، و، ونسخة في
ھ:كذا.ھ،وأصلن،ونسخةفيش: ⟩الفوت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
503 1.218.1 What a goal, and how distant! What a visitor, and how
heedless! What a danger, and how terrible! You reckless people have
emptied your minds of every lesson the dead could teach you but have
seized on their ancient glories!1 Is it of the felling of your forebears
that you boast? Or about the large numbers of their dead that you crow?
You attempt to resurrect those spiritless corpses and stilled
movements---they should be harsh lessons for you rather than a source of
pride, more correctly denigrated to a place of shame than elevated to a
position of honor!You view the deceased with night-blind eyes and plunge
with them into the deep waters of ignorance. But if you were to ask
their ruined homes and empty courtyards about them, they would answer:
"They were laid in the earth in their error, and you follow in their
footsteps in your ignorance.
Youtrampleontheirskullsandgrowcropsintheircorpses.Youpastureongrass
growing from their bodies and inhabit what they laid waste.The days will
weep and wail over you, just as they wept and wailed over them." 1.218.2
Theyhaveprecededyoutothedestinationthatyoutoowillreach.They are the
early arrivals scouting out your watering hole. Rulers or subjects in
this life, they grasped ploughshares of might and raced steeds of pride.
Then they journeyed into the belly of the earth, where she took over,
eating their flesh and drinking their blood. Morning dawned on them,
inert in the clefts of their graves, a mortgage that could not be
recovered. Now, the onset of dangers terri- fies them no more, worsening
conditions cause them no grief, they are neither shaken by earthquakes
nor do they heed claps of thunder, they have vanished and are no longer
awaited, they are present yet do not appear, they were all together, but
now are fragmented, they were friends, but now they are sepa- rated.
Their stories are forgotten and their homes silent, but not because of
the time that has passed or the distance of their abodes. They have been
given a cup to drink that has made their tongues dumb, their ears deaf,
and their move- ments still---a passing observer would describe them as
deep in slumber, but they are neighbors who do not give each other
comfort, friends who no longer visit, the ropes of affection between
them have frayed, the ties of brotherhood are severed, each of them is
alone, though they are all together, each of them is forsaken, though
they are all fellows. They do not recognize the morning after
thenight,ortheeveningaftertheday,whicheverof thetwotheydepartedin,be it
day or night, it stays with them forever---either they have found the
dangers of their new abode far more terrifying than they had feared, or
they have seen its blessed signs to be far greater than they had
anticipated. Both destinations are a home whose reality surpasses all
fear and all hope. 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Sabaʾ 34:52. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 504 Text and
Translation 1.218.3مهراثآ ١تيمع نئلو اونياع امو اودهاش ام ةفصب اوّيَعَ ل
اهب نوقطني اوناك ولف وٱنقطعت أخبارهم لقد رجعت فيهم أبصار العبر وسمعت
عنهم آذان العقول وتكلّموا من غير جهات النطق فقالوا كَل َ حَت الوجوه النواضر
وخَوَت الأجساد النواعم ولبسنا أهدام البِلى وت َ كاءَدَنا ضيق المضجع وتوارثنا
الوحشة وتهكّمت علينا الربوع الص توم ُ ّ فٱمّحت محاسن أجسادنا وتنكّرت معارف
صورنا وطالت في مساكن الوحشة إقامتنا
ولمنجدمنكربفرجًاولامنضيقمتّسعًا.فلومثّلتهمبعقلكأوكشفعنهممحجوب الغطاء لك وقد
ٱرتسخت أسماعهم باله َ وامّ فٱستكّت وٱكتحلت أبصارهم بالتراب فخسفت وتقطّعت
الألسنة في أفواههم بعد ذَلاقتها وهَمدت القلوب في صدورهم بعد ً لِ
بديدجمهنمةحراج ّلكيفثاعواهتظقي ىسَمّجهاوسهّلطرقالآفةإليهامستسلمات
فلاأيدٍتدفعولاقلوبتجزعلرأيتأشجانقلوبوأقذاءعيون.لهمفيكلّ فظاعةصفة حال لا
تنتقل وغمرة لا تنجلي. 1.218.4فكم أكلت الأرض من عزيز جسد وأنيق لون كان في
الدنيا غ َ ذي فَرَ ت ّ اً ّنِض هب تلزن ةبيصم نإ ةول َ ّسلا ىلإ عزفيو هنزح
ةعاس يف رورسلاب لّلعتي فرش بيبرو َ لِ بًةحاحَشو هشيع ةراضَغب هوِه ولعبه. فبينا
هو يضحك إلى الدنيا وتضحك إليه في ظلّ نم فوتُ حلا هيلإ ترظنو هاوق ماّيألا
تضقنو هكَسَح هب رهدلا ئطو ذإ لوفَغ شيع كَث َ بفخالطهبَث ٌّ لايعرفهونجيّ همّ
ماكانيجدهوتول ّ دتفيهفتراتعللآنسماكان بصحّته ففزع إلى ما كان عوّده الأطبّاء
من تسكين الحارّ بالقارّ وتحريك البارد بالحارّ ُ مب لدتعٱ الو ةدورب جّيه اّلإ
ٍّراحب كّرح الو ةرارح رّوَ ث اّلإ درابب ئفطي ملف مازج لتلك َ تو هضِّرمم لهذو هلِ
ّلعم رتف ىّتح ءاد تاذ ّلك اهنم ّدمأ اّلإ عئابطلا هئاد ةفصب هُ لهأ اياع
وخرسواعنجوابالسائلينعنهوتنازعوادونهشجىخبريكتمونه.فقائلهولمابهومُمنٍّ
لهمإيابعافيتهومُصبِّرلهمعلىفقدهيذ ىلعكلذكوهانيَ بف.هلبقنمنيضاملاىسأمهرّك
١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩درست⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 505 1.218.3 Had they been able to speak, they would have
faltered in describing what they witnessed, what they saw. But even
though their traces are effaced, and their stories erased, eyes that
heed warnings can still see them, and ears of the intelligent can hear.
For they speak to us, though without the instruments of speech, and this
is what they have to say: "Our fresh faces have become foul, and our
soft bodies putrid; we have donned the rags of decay, and the narrow
walls of our bedchambers hem us in, we have inherited the desolate strip
of the grave,andthissilentbiermocksus---herethebeautiesof
ourbodiesareerased,
ourdefinedfeaturesareunrecognizable.Longhasbeenourstayinthisdesolate
residence---we find no relief from our agony, no release from our
fetters!" If you were to depict them in your imagination, or if the veil
were removed and you could actually see them, this is what you would
see: ears blocked up and crawl- ing with scorpions,eyesburst open and
dirt the kohlthat smears them, tongues cut out after keen eloquence,
hearts once vigilant fallen silent in breasts, decay, ever new, ravaging
each of their limbs, making them hideous, and preparing the way for yet
more calamities to attack. All this, while the dead lie submis- sive,
hands unable to push anything away, hearts unable to recoil. You would
see the real anguish in each of their hearts and the pus in each of
their eyes. The abominations never move away. The pangs of horror never
dissipate. 1.218.4
Howcompletelyhastheeartheatenupthatpreciousbody,thatelegant color that
was nurtured in luxury and reared in grace! Whenever its owner was faced
with grief, he would soothe himself with sensual pleasures, whenever a
catastrophedescended,hewouldseekcomforts,clingingtothefreshnessof his
life and unwilling to give up his frolicsome play in the shade of his
reckless life. But even as he smiled at the world, and even as she
smiled back at him, time
piercedhimwithitsthorns,thedaysassaultedhissenses,anddeath'seyesdrew
ever closer. Then, a new and alien sorrow infected him, and anxieties
never felt before whispered in his ear. Earlier smugly complacent about
his health, dis- ease now birthed lassitude in his body. He rushed to
physicians for treatments, suppressing hot with cold and expelling cold
with hot, but his attempt to extin- guish hot with cold only made the
heat blaze, and his attempt to expel cold with hot only made the blast
more frigid---his attempt to balance the mixtures of these elements only
worsened his diseased organs. Eventually, his consol- ers grew tired and
his attendants neglectful. His family were no longer able to describe
his disease, and they stopped answering any who inquired about his
condition. They argued among themselves about the gravity of his
condition and concealed their thoughts from him. One said, "His disease
will take him." Another spoke hopefully of recovery. A third urged the
family to bear his loss withpatience,remindingthemof
howgenerationshadbornelossesinthepast. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 506 Text
and Translation جَناح من فراق الدنيا وترك الأحبّة إذ عرض له عارض من غُصصه
فتحيّرت نوافذ فطنتهويبسترطوبةلسانهفكممنمهمّ
منجوابهعرفهفعَيّعنردّهودعاءٍمؤلملقلبه سمعه فت َ صامّ عنه من كبير كان يعظّمه أو
صغير كان يرحمه. وإنّ للموت لغمرات هي أفظع من أن تستغرق بصفة أو تعتدل على
عقول أهل الدنيا. 1.219ِ هيِهْلُ ت ا َ ّل ٌلاَجِر﴿ هتوالت دنع مالسلا هيلع هل
مالك نمو مْ ت ِذ نَع ٌعْيَب اَلَوٌةَراَ ج ِ كْرِاللّٰه﴾ 1.219.1إنّ الله سبحانه جعل الذ
كر جِلاء للقلوب تسمع به بعد الوَقْرة وتبصر به بعد نامزأ يفو ةهربلا دعب ةهرُ
بلا يف هؤالآ تّزع هلل حِرَ ب امو ةدناعُ ملا دعب هب داقنَتو ةوشَعلا الفترات
عباد ناجاهم في فكرهم وكلّمهم في ذات عقولهم فٱستصبحوا بنور يقظة في الأسماع
والأبصار والأفئدة يذ كِّرون بأيّام الله ويخوّفون مقامه بمنزلة الأدل ّ تاوَ
لَفلا يف ة من أخذ القصد حمدوا إليه طريقه وبش ّ هيلإ اوّمذ اًلامشو اً نيمي
ذخأ نمو ةاجنلاب هور الطريق وحذّروه من الهلـكة وكانوا كذلك مصابيح تلك
الظلمات وأدل ّ ة تلك الشبهات. وإنّ للذ كر لأهل ً ا أخذوه من الدنيا بدلًا
فلم تشغلهم تجارة ولا بيع عنه يقطعون به أيّام الحياة ويهتفون بالزواجر عن
محارم الله في أسماع الغافلين ويأمرون بالقسط ويأتمرون به وينهون عن المنكر
ويتناهَون عنه فكأنّما قطعوا الدنيا إلى الآخرة وهم فيها فشاهدوا ما
مهيلعةمايقلاتقّقحوهيفةماقإلالوطيفخزرَ بلالهأبويغاوعلّطٱاّمنأكوكلذءارو
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
507 While this man was thus perched on the wing of departure from the
world and of separation fromlovedones,a suddenobstruction
chokedhisthroat.Hisacu- men turned to bewilderment and the saliva dried
up on his tongue. How many an important answer he knew but was unable to
give! How many an entreaty pained his heart, but he was forced to turn a
deaf ear! A question coming from an elder whom he revered, an appeal
from a young one whom he loved! Truly, the pangs of death are too
terrible to be contained in any description, or to be grasped by the
minds of the living. 1.219 From an address by ʿAlī upon reciting, «They
are men whom neither commerce nor trade distracts from God's
remembrance.»1 1.219.1 God has made his remembrance the burnish for your
hearts2---with it, you can hear after your earlier deafness, see after
your earlier night-blindness, and quieten after your earlier
recalcitrance. Age after age, even in periods of dormancy, God
communicates with certain servants whose minds he speaks to and whose
intellects he engages, who kindle bright lamps of vigilance in people's
ears, eyes, and hearts. God's gifts are precious! Guides in the wilder-
ness, his chosen men remind the nations of his special days,3 and warn
them that their meeting with him is near. They praise those who keep to
the middle road and give them tidings of salvation, they censure those
who stray to the right and the left and caution them against
damnation---in this way, they serve as lamps in times of darkness and
guides in periods of doubt. Remembrance is the province of men who
consider it fair exchange for worldly chattels, nei- ther commerce nor
trade distracts them fromit.They traverse their daysalways
rememberingGod,cryingwarningsagainsttheillicittotheearsof theheedless,
commanding justice and undertaking it, forbidding evil and staying away
from it. You would think they have already cut through the world to the
hereafter and are there now, as though they have already witnessed what
is beyond the grave. You would think they were privy to the mysteries of
the Barzakh from 1 Qurʾan, Nūr 24:37. On this oration, see Shah-Kazemi,
Justice and Remembrance, 134--207. 2 "Remembrance" (dhikr) refers to (1)
remembering God with the heart and with the tongue (Ḥ11:178; R 2:381; ʿA
668); and, specifically, (2) the Qurʾan (B 658--659), among whose names
is "The Wise Remembrance (al-Dhikr al-ḥakīm)," which reminds people of
God. 3 Lit. "God's days" (ayyām Allāh), were either (1) days of calamity
when retribution descended on past nations who defied God (R 2:382; B
659), or (2) days that God had consecrated for his worship. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 508 Text and
Translation عِداتها فكشفوا غطاء ذلك لأهل الدنيا حتّى كأنّهم يرون ما لا يرى
الناس ويسمعون ما لا يسمعون. 1.219.2فلو مثّلتهم لعقلك في مَقاوِمهم المحمودة
ومجالسهم المشهودة وقد نشروا دواوين أعمالهم وفرغوا لمحاسبة أنفسهم على كلّ
صغيرة وكبيرة أمروا بها فقصّروا عنها أو نُهوا عنها ففرّطوا فيها وحَمّلوا ثقل
أوزارهم ظهورَهم فضعفوا عن الاستقلال بها فنشجوا َ ي اً بيحن اوبواجتو اًجيشن
عِجّون إلى ربّهم من مقام ندم وٱعتراف لرأيت أعلام هدى ومصابيح دُجى قد حفّت بهم
الملائكة وتنزل ّ باوبأ مهل تحتُ فو ةنيكسلا مهيلع ت السماء وأُعدّت لهم مقاعد
الـكرامات في مقام١ ٱطّلع الله عليهم فيه فرضي سعيهم وحمد
مقامهميتنسّمونبدعائهرَوحالتجاوز.رهائنفاقةإلىفضلهوأُسارىذل ّ ةلعظمتهجرح طول
الأسى قلوبهم وطول البكا عيونهم لكلّ باب رغبة إلى الله منهم يد قارعة
يسألون من لا تضيق لديه المنادح ولا يخيب عليه الراغبون. فحاسب نفسك لنفسك
فإنّ غيرها من الأنفس لها حسيب غيرك. 1.220﴾ِميِرَكْـلا َكِّ بَرِ بَك َ ّرَغ اَم ُناَسن
ِإْلا اَ ه ُ ّيَأ اَي﴿ هتوالت دنع هلاق مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو 1.220.1أَدْحَض ُ
مسؤولٍ حجّةًوأقطعمغترٍّمعذرةلقدأبرحجهالةبنفسه.ياأيّهاالإنسان مأ لولُ ب كئاد نم
امأ كسفن ةكـلهب كسنآ امو كّبرب كّرغ امو كبنذ ىلع كأّرج ام يحاضلا ىرت امّبرلف
اهريغ نم محرت ام كسفن نم محرت امأ ةظقي كتَمْوَ ن نم سيل لحرّالشمس فتظل ّ ِ مُ
ي ملأب ىلتبملا ىرت وأ ه ض ّ جسده فتبكي رحمة له فما صبّرك على دائك
١م،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،ي،وأصلش،ھ،ونسخةفيم: ⟩مقعد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 509 long residence in it,1 asthough theyhavealreadyseen the
resurrectionfulfilling its promise. These men draw back the veil for the
living, until those who heed them see what most cannot see and hear what
most cannot hear. 1.219.2 You will see the strength of their piety if
you picture them in their praiseworthy standings and laudable sittings.
You will see them as they unfold the registers of their deeds and apply
themselves to reckoning their accounts; as they list every small and
large deed they were commanded to perform but fell short in
accomplishing, and note every one they were forbidden but trans-
gressed; as they feel the weight of their sins on their backs, but find
themselves too weak to bear the burden; as they sob then and choke with
tears, and wail to one another, and cry out to their Lord from
repentance and recognition. You will see that they are true banners of
guidance and lamps in the darkness, shaded by angels, enveloped by
gentle calm, awaited by heaven's open doors. There, they are promised
seats of high honor near God---he will be pleased with their deeds and
praise their efforts, and they will surely inhale the waft- ing
fragrance of his pardon. In this world, they choose to remain hostage to
his generosity and captives to his majesty. Long repentance has wounded
their hearts and long weeping has wounded their eyes. Their hand knocks
cease- lessly at every door of divine supplication---and surely, they
petition the one whose generosity never fades, whose suppliants are
never rebuffed. O listener, call yourself to account for your own soul!
Other souls have a reckoner other than you. 1.220 From an address by
ʿAlī upon reciting, «O human, what has deceived you into neglecting your
Generous Lord?»2 1.220.1 Of all who could be questioned, you have the
most unstable arguments and the most deficient excuses, your ignorance
of yourself is extreme---O human, what has emboldened you to sin, what
has deceived you into neglect- ing your Lord, what has made you
complacent about the damnation of your soul? Will you not cure yourself
of your disease, will you not wake from your slumber, will you not feel
compassion for your own soul as you have compas- sion for others? You
see a person burning in the hot sun, and you offer him shade. You see a
person whose body is wracked with pain, and you weep for 1 "The
Barzakh," lit., "a thing that intervenes between any two things," (Lane,
Lexicon, s.v. "B-R- Z-Kh"), interpreted as the intermediary station
between life on earth and the final end in hell or paradise. 2 Qurʾan,
Infiṭār 82:6. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 510 Text and
Translation وجل ّ دكعلىمصابكوعزّاكعنالبكاءعلىنفسكوهيأعزّ الأنفسعليكوكيفلا
يوقظك خوف بَيات نقمة وقد تورّطت بمعاصيه مدارج سطواته. فت َ داوَمن داء
الفترة في قلبك بعزيمة ومن كَرى الغفلة في ناظرك بيقظة وكن لله مطيعًا وبذ
كره آنسًا وتمثّل ىلإ هنع ٍّلوتم تنأو هلضفب كدّمغتيو هوفع ىلإ كوعدي كيلع
هلابقإ هنع كيّ لوت لاح يف غيره. 1.220.2فتعالىمنقوي ّ ماأكرمهوتواضعت َ
منضعيفماأجرأكعلىمعصيتهوأنت في كنف ستره مقيم وفي سعة فضله متقلّب فلم يمنعك
فضله ولم يهتك عنك ستره بل لم تخل من لطفه مَطْر َ ف َ عين في نعمة يحدثها لك
أو سيّئة يسترها عليك أو بليّة يصرفها عنكفماظنّكبهلوأطعتهوٱيماللهلوأنّ
هذهالصفةكانتفيمُتّفِقَي ْ نيَ يِزاوتمةّوقلايفِن في القدرة لـكنت َ أوّل حاكم على
نفسك بذميم الأخلاق ومساوي الأعمال.
ىلعكتنذآوتاظعلاكتفشاكدقلوتررتغٱاهبنكـلوكتّرغايندلااملوقأا ً ّقحو سواء
ولهي بما تعدك من نزول البلاء بجسمك والنقص١ في قوّتك أصدق وأوفى من أن
تكذبك أو تغرّك ولرب ّ ناصح لها عندك متّهم وصادق من خبرها مكذّب ولئن تعرّفتها
في الديارالخاويةوالربوعالخاليةلتجدنّهامنحسنتذ كيركوبلاغموعظتكبمحل ّ
ةالشفيق ءادعسلا ّنإواً ّلحماهنّطويملنم
ّلحمواًراداهبضريملنمرادمعنلوكبحيحشلاوكيلع بالدنيا غدًا هم الهاربون منها
اليوم إذا رجفت الراجفة وحقّت بجلائلها القيامة ولحق بكلّ منسك أهله وبكلّ
معبود عبدته وبكلّ مطاع أهل طاعته. فلم يُجْز َفي عدله وقسطه
يومئذخرقبصرفيالهواءولاهمسقدمفيالأرضإلّابحقّهفكمحجّةيومذاكداحضة وعلائق عذر
منقطعة. فت َ ىقبي ام ذخو كتّجح هب تبثتو كرذع هب موقي ام كرمأ نم َ ّرَح لك
ممّا لا تبقى له وتيسّر لسفرك وش ِ م برق النجاة وٱرحل مطايا التشمير.
١ن،ش،ھ:كذا.م،ي: ⟩النقض⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
511 him. What has made you so stoic about your own disease, so
forbearing in your own affliction, so resigned that you do not weep for
your own soul? It is surely the most precious of all souls to you! How
is it that fear of a sudden strike in the night does not keep you awake,
when your sins have hurled you into the path of God's assaults? Renew
your resolve and vigilance, O human, cure your heart of apathy and your
eyes of slumber. Obey God and take comfort in his remembrance! While you
are turning away from him, picture him turning to you, calling you to
his forgiveness, covering you with his generosity, even as you turn from
him to another. 1.220.2 How exalted is God, how strong, how generous!
How lowly you are,
howweak,howbrazen!Youcontinuetodisobeyhimwhileyouenjoyhisshelter,
whileyouliveintheshadeof hisexpansivegenerosity,yetheneitherholdsback
his gifts nor rends the veil he has drawn. Never, even for the blink of
any eye, are you deprived of his many kindnesses---here he bestows a
favor, there he con-
cealsatransgression,hereagainheturnsacalamityawayfromyou.Howdoyou think
he will treat you then if you obey him? By God, if this situation
obtained among two individuals equal in strength and identical in power,
you would be the first to condemn yourself for your immoral traits and
wicked deeds! I say this truly: The world has not deceived you, it is
you who have chosen to
bedeceived.She,infact,hasgivenyouopencounselandfairwarning.Inallthat she
promises---of affliction attacking your body and your strength waning---
she is too true, too faithful to lie or deceive. How many counsellors
she sent have you accused of falsehood? How many reports she recounted
have you refused to believe? If you were to seek knowledge of her
reality in her empty homes and abandoned courtyards, you would discover
through these striking reminders and far-reaching counsel that the world
feels only compassion for you and deep caring. O how good a home she is
for those who don't want her as their home! How good an abode she is for
those who don't adopt her as their native land! Those who flee from the
world today are those to whom she will grant true happiness tomorrow.
This, when the earth convulses at the blast of the trumpet, when the
resurrection with its great calamities arrives, when all
followersaregivenovertotheritestheyfollowed,allworshippersaregivenover
to the deities they worshipped, and all who obeyed are given over to
those they obeyed. That day, in the realm of God's fairness and justice,
every glance of an eye, every tread of a foot, will be requited with its
due. How many arguments will be refuted on that day, how many trailing
excuses will be severed! Follow a course, then, that will support your
account and prove your claim. Take pro- visions that will remain for
you, from this place in which you will not remain. Prepare for your
journey. Seek the rain-giving lightning of salvation. Saddle the steeds
of readiness. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 512 Text and
Translation 1.221ومن كلام له عليه السلام 1.221.1والله لأن أبيت على حَسَك
السعدان مسهّدًا وأُجَرّ في الأغلال مصفّدًا أحب ّ ُ حلا نم ءيشل اً بصاغو دابعلا
ضعبل اً ملاظ ةمايقلا موي هلوسرو هللا ىقلأ نأ نم ّيلإ طام وكيف أظلم أحدًا
لنفس يسرع إلى البِلى قفولها ويطول في الثرى حلولها. 1.221.2والله لقد رأيت
عقيل ً هنايبص تيأرو اًعاص مكّرُ ب نم ينحامتسٱ ىّتح قلمأ دقو ا شُعْث الألوان من
فقرهم كأنّما سوّدت وجوههم بالعِظْلِم وعاودني مؤ كّدًا و كرّر عليّ القول مردّدًا
فأصغيت إليه سمعي فظنّ أن ّ يتقيرط اً قرافم هدايق عبّتأو ينيد هعيبأ ي
فأحميتله حديدةثمّأدنيتهامنجسمهليعتبر بها فضجّ ضجيجذي دَن َ فمنألمها وكاد
أنيحـترق١منمِيسمها.فقلتلهث َ ِ ئَ تَأليقعايلكاوثلا َكْتَ لِك نّ
منحديدةأحماهاإنسانها للعبه وتجرّني إلى نار سجّرها جبّارها لغضبه أتئنّ من
الأذى ولا أئنّ من لظى. 1.221.3وأعجب ُ من ذلك طارق ٌ طرقنا بملفوفة في
وعائها ومعجونة شَنِئتُها كأنّما عُجنت اذاللاقفتيبلا
َلهأانيلعمّرحمكلذفةقدصمأةاكزمأةلصأتلقفاهئيَ قوأةّيحقيرِ ب وذ مأ طبتخمأ
ينعدختل ينتيتأ هللا نيد نعأ لوبُ هلا َكْتَ لِبَه تلقف ةّيده اهّنكـلو كاذ الو
جِنّةأمتهجر.واللهلوأُعطيتالأقاليمالسبعةبماتحتأفلاكهاعلىأنأعصياللهفينملة
١ش،ن،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.م،ي: ⟩يحرق⟨.نسخةفيھ: ⟩يخرق⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 513 1.221 From an address by ʿAlī:1 1.221.1 By God! I would
prefer to lie on a bed of three-pronged Saʿdān thorns and be dragged
along the ground in iron fetters than to meet God and his Mes-
sengeronthedayof resurrectionhavingoppressedanyof hisservantsorhaving
usurped any part of any person's property! How could I oppress someone
to benefit a body that is part of a caravan speeding toward decay, which
will long reside inside the belly of the earth! 1.221.2 By God! I saw
ʿAqīl, in his dire poverty, begging me for a measure of wheat from the
treasury, and I saw his children, ashen from destitution, as if their
faces had been blackened with indigo.2 He implored, he insisted, he
entreated over and over, and since I listened, he assumed I would sell
out my religion. He thought I'd be led by his rope and step off my path.
I wanted him to understand. I heated an iron bar and brought it close to
his body, and he screamed in pain, as if stabbed by the pangs of an
excruciating illness. "May your women mourn you, ʿAqīl!" I cried, "How
do you bawl so from the pain inflicted by an iron that a human has
carelessly heated, while you drag me into the Fire of Wrath stoked by
the All-Powerful Lord? How is it that you scream from this small injury
and think I should not scream from the flames of hell?" 1.221.3 Even
stranger is the case of the night visitor who brought me a gift wrapped
in a box, a cake that I found as hateful as though it had been kneaded
withthevenomorbileof asnake.3"Isthisanofferingtocurryfavor,orthealms-
levy, or charity?" I asked him, "for all those are forbidden to us, the
Prophet's household." "It is none of those, but a free gift," he
replied. I rebuked him then, "May your mother lose you! Have you come to
lead me astray from God's religion? Has the devil touched you, or the
jinn? Are you in a state of delir- ium?"4 By God, if I were given the
earth's seven climes and everything that lies below the celestial
spheres in exchange for disobeying God in something as paltry as
snatching the husk of a single grain of barley from the mouth 1
Presumably in Kufa after the arbitration in 37/658, since ʿAqīl
(mentioned at §1.221.2) then went to Muʿāwiyah for help. 2
ʿAqīlibnAbīṬālibwasʿAlī'sbrother.Detailsof
ʿAlī'sexchangewithhimarerelatedinḤ11:250-- 254; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
125--131. 3 The "night-visitor" is said to be the Kufan notable
al-Ashʿath ibn Qays. Ḥ11:247--248; B 667. 4 It is possible that ʿAlī's
reply to Ashʿath continues to the end of the following line, "... I
should not do so." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 514 Text and
Translation أسلبهاجِلْب َ شَعيرةمافعلته.وإنّ دنياكمعنديلأهونمنورقةفيفمجَرادةت
َ قضُمها. ما لعليٍّ ولنعيمٍ يفنى ولذّة لا تبقى. نعوذ بالله من سُبات العقل وقبح
الزلل وبه نستعين. 1.222ومن دعاء له عليه السلام اللّٰهمّ
صُنوجهيباليسارولاتبذلجاهيبالإقتارفأسترزق َ طالبيرزقِك١وأستعطف َ ش ِ رار
خلقك وأُبتلى بحمد من أعطاني وأُفتت َ ن بذمّ من منعني وأنت من وراء ذلك كلّه َ
لَ ع َكَ ّن ِإ﴿ عنملاو ءاطعإلا ّيلو ى كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌ﴾. 1.223ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام دار بالبلاء محفوفة وبالغدر معروفة لا تدوم أحوالها ولا يسلم
نزّالها أحوال مختلفة وتارات متصرّفة العيش فيها مذموم والأمان منها معدوم
وإنّما أهلها فيها أغراض مستهدفة ترميهم بسهامها وت ُ فنيهم بحِمامها.
وٱعلموا عباد الله أنّكم وما أنتم فيه من هذه الدنيا على سبيل من قد مضى
قبلـكم ممّن كان أطول منكم أعمارًا وأعمر ديارًا وأبعد آثارًا أصبحت أصواتهم
هامدة ورياحهم راكدة وأجسادهم بالية وديارهم خالية وآثارهم عافية فٱستبدلوا
بالقصور المشيّدة والنمارق الممهّدة الصخور والأحجار المسنّدة والقبور برتقم
اهّلحمف اهؤانب بارتلاب دّيشو اهؤانِف بارخلا ىلع ينُ ب دق يتلا ةدحلملا
ةئطاللا وساكنها مغترب بين أهل محل ّ ة موحشين وأهل فراغ متشاغلين لا
يستأنسون بالأوطان ولا يتواصلون تواصل الجـيران على ما بينهم من قرب الجوار
ودنوّالدار وكيف يكون بينهم تزاور وقد طحنهم ب ِ كَلكَل ِ ام ىلإ مترص دق نأكو
.ىرثلاو لدانَ جلا مهتلكأو ىلِبلا ه صاروا إليه وٱرتهنكم ذلك المضجع وضمّكم
ذلك المستودع فكيف بكم لو تناهت بكم ١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩رفدك⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
515 of a single ant, I should not do so. This world of yours is worth
less to me than a leaf munched in the mouth of a locust. What would ʿAlī
want with delights that will perish and pleasures that will not remain?
We entreat God to protect our intelligence from dulling, and from
terrible slips and falls. It is him we ask for aid. 1.222 From a
supplication by ʿAlī: God! Protect my countenance through prosperity, do
not dissipate my dignity through poverty. Let me not importune seekers
of your sustenance or beg kind-
nessfromyourworstcreatures.Letmenotbeafflictedwithflatteringthosewho
give or provoked to reviling those who refuse. You---beyond them
all---are the one who gives or refuses, «you are powerful over all
things».1 1.223 From an oration by ʿAlī:2 This is a residence encircled
by trials and renowned for deceit, its conditions are never stable, its
residents are never safe, its states are changing, its times are
unstable, its life is sordid, its security is nonexistent, and its
people are targets for arrows that shoot to kill. Servants of God, know
that you, along with the world you live in, tread the path of those who
went before: they were longer lived than you, they had more flourishing
homes than you, they had more last- ing monuments than you, but their
voices have fallen silent, their breath has stilled, their bodies have
decomposed, their homes are abandoned, their mon-
umentsaregone.Theyhaveexchangedfortifiedpalacesandcushionedthrones for
immovable stones and rocks, for the crushing recess of graves whose
court- yard is built on ruin and shored with dirt, whose dwelling is
near, but whose residents are far away and out of reach. For they reside
in a community who take no comfort from one another, who need not labor
yet are preoccupied,
who,thoughtheyliveinproximityandtheirhomesarenear,findneithersolace
intheirhomelandnorvisittheirneighbors.Buthowwouldtheyvisit?Fordecay has
crushed them, like a massive camel with a heavy chest, and rocks and
earth have consumed their bodies. People, imagine that you too have
arrived at the place where they have gone, as though that same bed has
claimed you, that 1 Qurʾan, Taḥrīm 66:8. 2 Sibṭ(Tadhkirah, 122--123)
reports this as part of an oration he says is named The Attainer, or The
Eloquent Oration (Bālighah). In his text, he includes lines also present
in §1.42, deliv- ered in Kufa immediately following ʿAlī's arrival there
after the Battle of the Camel in Rajab 36/January--February 657.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 516 Text and
Translation ِ لاَ نُه﴿ روبقلا ترثعُ بورومألا َ ن ُ ّلُك وُ لْبَت َك َ ل ِإ
اوّدُروتَفلسَأا َ ّم ٍسْف ىاللّٰهِمَوْلَاهُمُالْح َ قِّ ُ هْنَع َ ّلَضَو َ ي اوُ ناَك ا َ ّم م
.﴾َنوُرَ تْف 1.224ومن دعائه عليه السلام اللّٰهمّ إنّك آنس الآنسين لأوليائك
وأحضرهم بالـكفاية للمتوكّلين عليك تشاهدهم في سرائرهم وتطّلع عليهم في
ضمائرهم وتعلم مبلغ بصائرهم فأسرارهم لك مكشوفة
وقلوبهمإليكملهوفة.إنأوحشتهمالغربةآنسهمذ كركوإنصبّتعليهمالمصائبلجأوا َ فنإ
ّمهّٰللا.كئاضقنعاهرداصموكديبرومألاةّمِزَأ ّنأباً ملعكبةراجتسالاىلإ هِهْت ُ عن
مسألتي أو عَمِهت سيلف يدشارم ىلإ يبلقب ذخو يحلاصم ىلع ينَ ّ لُدف يتبلط نع ١
ُ ذاك بن ُ كْرٍ من هداياتك ولا بب ِ دْعٍ من كفاياتك. اللّٰهمّ ٱحملني على عفوك
ولا تحملني على عدلك. 1.225ومن كلام له عليه السلام
للهبلاد٢فلانفقدقوّمالأَوَدودَاوىالعَمَدأقامالسنّةوخلّفالفتنةذهبنقيّ الثوب قليل
العيب أصاب خيرها وسبق شرّها أدّى إلى الله طاعته وٱتّقاه بحقّه رحل وتركهم في
طرق متشعّبة لا يهتدي فيها الضالّ ولا يستيقن المهتدي. 1.226ومن كلام له عليه
السلام في وصف بيعته بالخلافة وقد تقدّم مثله بألفاظ مختلفة ١م، ي، ونسخة في
ش، ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ھ: ⟩عميت⟨. ٢ش، ن، ي، ھ، ومصحّحة
فيم:كذا.أصلم،ونسخةفيي،ھ: ⟩بلاء⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
517 same dwelling has encased you! How will it be with you when affairs
end, when graves are emptied?1 «There, each soul will be tried for what
it did in past times, and all creatures will be returned to God, their
true master---their falsehoods will no longer avail.»2 1.224 From a
supplication by ʿAlī: God! You are the greatest comforter for those who
love you, the readiest care- giver for those who trust you. You see
their minds, view their thoughts, and know the strength of their
perceptions, their secrets are open to you, and their hearts long for
you. When loneliness makes them fearful, your remembrance gives them
comfort, when calamities rain down, they seek refuge in your pro-
tection.They know that your hand holds the reinsof all things, that
yourdecree steersthecourseof
allevents.God,wheneverIfalterinasking,wheneverIstray from my goal, guide
me to my advantage and lead my heart to the right path, for that is not
alien to your way of guidance or new to your way of care. God, mount me
on the steed of your forgiveness, do not mount me on the steed of your
justice. 1.225 From an address by ʿAlī: May God cherish the land that
produced that man!3 He straightened crooked backs and healed lesions
that were hidden inside fatty humps, established tra- dition and shunned
sedition, departed with clean garments and few faults, hit the target of
good and raced away from evil, offered obedience to God and feared him
as was his due. But he went on, leaving others to scatter in many
different paths---paths in which the errant find no guidance, the guided
no certainty. 1.226 From an address by ʿAlī describing the manner of the
pledge to him as caliph. Similar lines have been recorded earlier in
slightly different language:4 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Infiṭār 82:4. 2
Qurʾan, Yūnus 10:30. 3 This is an idiom used for commendation. "That
man," lit. "So-and-So ( fulān)," refers, accord- ing to the Shiʿi
commentators, to an unnamed Companion (R 2:402; B 682). According to the
Sunni commentators, the reference is to ʿUmar (Ḥ12:3--5; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh,
4:218). 4 Delivered at Dhū Qār just before the march on Basra and the
Battle of the Camel in 36/656; §1.228 is part of the same oration
(Mufīd, Jamal, 143--144, citing Wāqidī). See details of the event in
Iskāfī, Miʿyār, 49--50. Similar lines in §1.3.4 (Shiqshiqiyyah), §1.53,
and §1.135.2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 518 Text and
Translation وبسطتم يدي فكففتها ومددتموها فقبضتها ثمّ تداككتم عليّ ت َ
ميهلا لبإلا َ ّكاد على حياضها يوم ورودها حتّى ٱنقطعت النعل وسقط الرداء
ووُطئ الضعيف وبلغ من سرورالناسببيعتهمإيّاي ّ
أنٱبتهجبهاالصغيروهَدَجإليهاالـكبيروتحاملنحوهاالعليل وحَس َ رت إليها
الـكَعاب. 1.227ومن خطبة له عليه السلام 1.227.1لانُ
توبراهلاوجنيوبلاطلاحجنياهبداعمةريخذودادسحاتفمهللاىوقت ّنإف
ةيراجمالقألاوةيداهلاحلاوعمسيءاعدلاوعفنتةبوتلاوعفرُ يلمعلاواولمعٱفبئاغرلا
َ ل مداه توملا ّنإف اًسلاخ اًتوم وأ اًسباح اًضرم وأ اًسكان اً رمع لامعألاب
اوردابو ذّاتكم ومكدّر شهواتكم ومُباعد طِيّاتكم زائر غير محبوب وقِرْن غير مغلوب
وواتر غير مطلوب ١تعباتتو هتوطس مكيف تمظعو هلِ باعَم مكتدصقأو هلئاوغ
مكتفّنكتو هلئابح مكتقلعأ دق عليكمع َ
دوتهوقلّتعنكمنَبْوَتهفيوشِكأنتغشاكمدواجيظللهوٱحتدامعللهوحَنادِس
غمراتهوغواشيسكراتهوأليمإزهاقه٢ودُجُوّإطباقهوجشوبة٣مَذاقهفكأنقدأتاكمبغتةً
فأسكت نجيّكم وفرّق نديّكم وعفّى آثار كم وعطّل ديار كم وبعث وُرّاثكم يقتسمون
تراثكم بين حميم خاص ّ لم ينفع وقريب محزون لم يمنع وآخر شامت لم يجزع.
1.227.2فعليكمبالجدّوالاجتهادوالتأهّبوالاستعدادوالتزوّدفيمنزلالزادولاتغرنّكم
الدنيا كما غرّت من كان قبلـكم من الأمم الماضية والقرون الخالية الذين
ٱحتلبوا دِرّتها وأصابوا غِرّتها وأفنوا عِدّتها وأخلقوا جِدّتها أصبحت مساكنهم
أجداثًا وأموالهم ١ش، ن، ي، ھ: كذا. م: ⟩تتايعت⟨. ٢ش، ن، ي: كذا. م، ونسخة
في ھ: ⟩إرهاقه⟨. ٣ش، ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩خشونة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 519 You pulled my hand toward you, and I resisted. You
forced it open, and I closed it shut. Then, like parched camels jostling
each other at the waterhole on their
allocatedday,youcrowdedaroundme,yoursandalstearing,yourcloaksfalling,
the slow trampled underfoot. In your delight to pledge me allegiance,
children sped rejoicing, the old and unsteady hurried, the sick asked to
be carried, and young girls ran out without putting on a veil. 1.227
From an oration by ʿAlī:1 1.227.1 Consciousnessof
Godisthekeytorighteousnessandastoreof treasure for the return. Because
of it, one who seeks succeeds, one who flees escapes, and all wishes are
obtained. People, act while deeds still ascend, repentance still
benefits, supplications are still heard, affairs are still calm, and
pens still flow with ink. Hasten to do good before your lifespan runs
out, disease seizes you, and death snatches you away. Remember that
death is the destroyer of pleasures, the roiler of passions, and the
expeller of hopes, a visitor who is not loved, an adversary who is never
vanquished, and a shedder of blood from whom no vengeance can be
extracted. Already its snares have entrapped you, its misfortunes have
encircled you, and its arrowheads fly toward you. Its assault is
terrible, its attack is unremitting, and chances are small that its
sword will glance off your skull. Soon you will be surrounded by its
low- ering clouds, its burning illnesses, its dark floods, its
calamitous spasms, its painful piercing, its dusky folds, and its coarse
rations. Imagine that death has already, abruptly, arrived, as though it
has already silenced your conversa- tions, scattered your assemblies,
erased your footsteps, emptied your homes, and prompted your heirs to
divide your inheritance. There you lie---among close relatives who
cannot help you, and grieving kinsfolk who cannot push away death, and
among others who gloat and feel no sorrow at your depar- ture. 1.227.2
Expend effort, work hard, prepare stocks, ready supplies, and gather
provisions in this waystation. Let not the world deceive you as she
deceived those before you, ancient nations and past generations who
milked her udders, hoarded her choice parts,2 used up her days, and wore
out her new clothes. 1 Ḥ13:7: "This is one of ʿAlī's most beautiful
orations---its rhetorical embellishments (badīʿ, referring here to
parallelism, paronomasia, antithesis, and consonant-rhyme) are clearly
vis- ible to any who would look." 2 Ar. aṣābū ghurratahā. Or,
"benefitted from her (temporary) carelessness (ghirratahā)," after R
2:404; ʿA 973. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 520 Text and
Translation ميراثًا لا يعرفون من أتاهم ولا يحفلون من بكاهم ولا يجيبون من
دعاهم فٱحذروا اهؤانع يضقني الو اهؤاخر مودي ال عوزَ ن ةسبلم عونَم ةيطعم
عودَخ ةراّرغ اهّنإف ايندلا ولا ير كد بلاؤها. 1.227.3منها في صفة الزهّاد
كانوا قومًا من أهل الدنيا وليسوا من أهلها فكانوا فيها كمن ليس منها عملوا
فيها بما يبصرون وبادروا فيها ما يحذرون ت ُ َ نارْهَظ نيب مهنادبأ بَ ّلق ي
أهل الآخرة يرون أهل الدنيا يعظّمون موت أجسادهم وهم أشدّ إعظامًا لموت قلوب
أحيائهم. 1.228ومن خطبة له عليه السلام خطبها بذي قار وهو متوجّه إلى البصرة
ذ كرها الواقدي ّ في كتاب الجمل ّ لأو قتفلا هب قترو عدصلا هب هللا َ ّمَلَ ف
هّبر ةلاسر غّلبو هب رمُأ امب عدصف ف به بين ذوي الأرحام بعد العداوة الواغرة
في الصدور والضغائن القادحة في القلوب. 1.229ومن كلام له عليه السلام كلّم
به عبد الله بن زَمَعة وهو من شيعته وذلك أنّه قدم عليه في خلافته وطلب منه
مالًا فقال عليه السلام إنّ هذا المال ليس لي ولا لك وإنّما هو ف َ يء
المسلمين وجَل َ ب ُ أسيافهم فإن شركتَهم في .مههاوفأ ريغل نوكت ال مهيديأ
ةانَ جف اّلإو مهّظح لثم كل ناك مهبرح 1.230ومن كلام له عليه السلام al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
521 Their homes have become sepulchers and their possessions have been
inher- ited by others. They no longer recognize those who come to them,
or heed those who weep over them, or answer those who call out to them.
Beware of the world! She deceives and cheats, gives then denies,
provides clothes then strips them away. Her ease does not last, her
struggles do not end, and her trials never quieten. 1.227.3 From the
same oration, in praise of renunciants: They were of this world yet not
of her. They lived in her as those who never truly belonged, enacting
what they believed and outracing what they feared.1 Their forms moved
among the people of the hereafter: they saw men here fear the death of
their bodies, but they were more afraid of the death of the hearts of
the living. 1.228
FromanorationbyʿAlīdeliveredatDhūQār,enroutetoBasra,relatedbyWāqidī in
his book on the Battle of the Camel:2 God's Messenger proclaimed what he
had been commanded to proclaim,3 and communicated the messages of his
Lord. Through him, God mended divisions and stitched rips and tears.
Through him, God brought kinsfolk together after enmity had burned in
their breasts and rancor had kindled in their hearts. 1.229
FromanaddressbyʿAlītoʿAbdallāhibnZamaʿah,oneof hisfollowers,whocame
during his caliphate to ask for money:4 These funds do not belong to me,
and they do not belong to you.They are battle gains won by the Muslims
and wealth procured by their swords. If you join in their warfare, you
will get a similar share, otherwise, the harvest of their swords is for
their mouths alone. 1.230 From an address by ʿAlī:5 1 I.e., death
(Ḥ13:8); or God's punishment (B 677). 2 In 36/656, before the Battle of
the Camel. Part of the same oration as §1.226. 3 Reference to Qurʾan,
Ḥijr 15:94. 4 Presumably in Kufa, between 36/656 and 40/661. ʿAbdallāh
ibn Zamaʿah was from Quraysh, and one of ʿAlī's devoted followers. 5
Part of a long oration (presumably in Kufa, during his caliphate,
35--40/656--661) after Jaʿdah ibn Hubayrah al-Makhzūmī, ʿAlī's nephew,
who had ascended the pulpit at his command to orate, stood there
tongue-tied. The Abbasid commander who defeated the Umayyads, Abū Muslim
al-Khurāsānī, re-used these lines by ʿAlī in one of his well-known
orations. Ḥ13:130; B 679. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 522 Text and
Translation ألا إنّ اللسان ب َ ض ْ عَة من الإنسان فلا ي ُ ّ تٱ اذإ قطنلا
هلهمُ ي الو عنتمٱ اذإ لوقلا هدعس سع. وإنّا لأمراء الكلام وفينا تنشّبت عروقه
وعلينا تهدّلت غصونه. وٱعلموا رحمكم الله أنّكم في زمان القائل فيه بالحقّ
قليل واللسان عن الصدق كليل واللازم للحقّ ذليل أهله معتكفون على العصيان
مصطلحون على الإدهان فتاهم عارم وشائبهم آثم وعالمهم منافق وقارئهم مماذق
لا يعظّم صغيرهم كبيرهم ولا يعول غنيّهم فقيرهم. 1.231ومن كلام له عليه
السلام في ذ كر ٱختلاف الناس. روى اليمانيّ١ عن أحمد بن قتيبة عن
ُذدقولاقفمالسلاهيلعنينمؤملاريمأدنعاّ نكلاق٢ةنْجَدنبكلامنعديزينبهللادبع
كرعنده ٱختلاف الناس إنّما فرّق بينهم مبادئ طينهم وذلك أنّهم كانوا فِلْقة من
سَب َ خ أرض وعذبها وحُزون تربة وسهلها. فهم على حسب قرب٣ أرضهم يتقاربون
وعلى قدر ٱختلافهم يتفاوتون. بيرقو رظنملا حيبق لمعلا يكازو ةّمهلا ريصق
ةماقلا ُ ّداَمو لقعلا صقان ءاورلا ّماتف
بللاقّرفتمبلقلاهئاتوةبيلجلاركنمةبيرضلافورعمورْب َ ّسلاديعبرعقلا ّ
وطليقاللسان حديد الجنان. 1.232ومن كلام له عليه السلام قاله وهو يلي غسل
رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله وتجهيزه بأبي أنت وأمّي لقد ٱنقطع بموتك ما
لم ينقطع بموت غيرك من النبوّة والأنباء وأخبار
.ءاوسكيفسانلاراصىّتحتممعوكاوسنّمعاً يّلسمترصىّتحتصصخ.ءامسلا ١ش:كذا.م:
⟩الثماليّ⟨.ي: ⟩اليماميّ⟨.ن:سقطالاسم.تختلفمخطوطاتشرحالراوندي ّ ،حيث تثبت
⟩ذعلب اليمانيّ⟨و⟩أبو محمد اليمانيّ⟨. شرح ٱبن أبي الحديد ⟩ذعلب اليماميّ⟨.
شرح البحرانيّ: ⟩أبو محمد ذعلب اليمانيّ⟨. ھ: سقط التعليق بتمامه. نونب اذكه
ةلّكشم⟨ةَ ّنُجُد⟩ :م .اذك :ش٢ مشدّدة. ي: ⟩دِحْي َ ة⟨. ن، ھ: سقط الاسم. ٣ش، ن، ھ
مع علامة الصحّة: كذا. م: سقطت اللفظة.ي: ⟩قرار⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 523 Hark! The tongue is but an instrument wielded by men.1
Words do not come to it when a man feels constrained, nor does it
hesitate to produce speech when its owner feels at ease. Indeed, it is
we, the Prophet's family, who are the princes of language.2 It is in us
that its roots are fixed, upon us that its branches dangle.
Knowthis,mayGodhavemercyonyou!Youliveinanagewhenupholdersof right are
few, tongues are blunted against truth, and champions of justice are
shamed. People in this age practice incessant disobedience and shake
hands on treason.Their youth are violent, their old are sinners, their
scholars are hyp- ocrites, and their Qurʾan-readers are two-faced. Their
young do not respect the old, their rich do not care for the poor. 1.231
From ʿAlī's address explaining why people differ. Yamānī3 narrated this
report from Aḥmad ibn Qutaybah, who narrated it from ʿAbdallāh ibn Mālik
ibn Dajnah,4 who said: We were with the Commander of the Faithful when
the talk turned to differences among people, and he said: What
differentiates them is the source of their clay, for they are fragments
from saline or sweet soil, and from hard or smooth earth.They resemble
one another based on the closeness of their soil and diverge in
accordance with its differ- ence. A person may have perfect features but
an imperfect mind, or be tall in stature but short in aspiration, or
have beautiful deeds but an ugly appearance, or he may have little depth
yet be able to sense a great deal, or his temper could be good while his
traits are bad, or his heart could be lost while his wits are also
scattered, or he could possess an eloquent tongue as well as a strong
heart. 1.232 From an address ʿAlī delivered as he conducted the
Messenger's funeral ablu- tions and prepared his body for burial:5 May
my father and mother give their lives for you! Your death has cut short
what the death of no other has: prophecy, divine reports, and accounts
of the heavens. You brought some of us so close that you comforted us
against the loss of anyone else, yet you were there for all---all people
were equal in your 1 Ar. baḍʿah, lit. "part" or "piece," translated here
as "instrument," based on Ḥ13:12; B 679. 2 I have added "the Prophet's
family" based on context in B 679. 3 Or, "Yamāmī" (ms Y), or, "Thumālī"
(ms M), or, "Dhiʿlib al-Yamānī" (Ḥ, and some mss of R). 4 Or, "Dujunnah"
(ms M), or, "Diḥyah" (ms Y). 5 In Medina, in 11/632. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 524 Text
and Translation ولولا أنّك أمرت بالصبر ونهيت عن الجزع لأنفدنا عليك ماء
الشؤون ولكان الداء مماطل ً اوالكَم َ يّمأوتنأيبأب.هعفدعاطتسيالوهّدركلمُ
يالامهّنكـلو.كلاَ ّلَ قواًفلاحمد ٱذ كرنا عند ربّك وٱجعلنا من بالك. زيادة على
الاصل١ 1.233ومن كلام له عليه السلام ٱقتص ّ فيه ذ كر ما كان منه بعد هجرة
النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ثمّلَحاقه به فجعلت ُ أتّبع مأخذ رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه فأَطَأُ ذِ كر َ ه حتّى ٱنتهيت إلى العَرْج في حديث طويل فقوله عليه
السلام ⟩فأطأ ذ كره⟨من الكلام الذي رمى به إلى غايت َ ي الفصاحة والإيجاز
وأراد أنّني كنت أُعطى خبرَه عليه السلام من بدء خروجي إلى أن ٱنتهيت إلى هذا
الموضع فكَنٰى عن ذلك بهذه الكناية العجيبة. 1.234ومن خطبة له عليه السلام في
شأن الحكمين وذمّ أهل الشام ُ لُ تو بْوَأ ّلك نم اوعِّمُج مازْقَأ ديبعو ماغَط ٌةافُج
قِّطوا من كلّ شَوب ممّن ينبغي أن ي ُ ه َ ّقف ويؤدّب ويعلّم ويدرّب ويول ّ ى عليه
ويؤخذ على يديه. ليسوا من المهاجرين والأنصار ولا الذين تبوّءوا الدار. ألا
وإنّ القوم ٱختاروا لأنفسهم أقرب القوم ممّا يحبّون وأنّكم ٱخترتم لأنفسكم أقرب
القوم ممّا تكرهون. وإنمّا عهدُكم بعبد الله بن قيس بالأمس يقول إنّها فتنة
فقَطِّعوا أوتار كم ١أضيفت هنا في بعض المخطوطات زيادة على الأصل قديمة، وهي
عبارة عن ست ّ خطب أخرى لعليّ، مسبوقة في مخطوطة ي، ھ، ل بسطر يشير الى أن
الخطب زائدة على الأصل: ⟩زيادة من نسخةكتبت في عهد المصنّف⟨. والخطب الستّة
الزائدة مثبتة أيضًا في م، چ، ك،
وثلاثمنهافيس،ولـكنبدوناشارةإلىأنّهازائدة.والزوائدساقطةعنش،ن،د،ق،ع، ت.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
525 eyes.1 If you had not commanded us to be patient in adversity or
forbidden outpourings of grief, we would have used up all the tears in
our eyes weeping over you, and our ailment would be chronic, our grief
would endure---and yet both would be sorely inadequate! But enough!
Death cannot be fended off or rebuffed. May my father and mother be your
ransom, O Messenger! Remember us to your Lord and keep us in your
thoughts. Additional Orations2 1.233 From an address by ʿAlī in which he
narrated what all he did after the Prophet's migration until he caught
up with him:3 I began to follow the path taken by God's Messenger and
continued to tread the foot- steps of his reports until I reached ʿArj.
Raḍī: This is a passage from a long address by ʿAlī. His words, "I
continued to tread the footsteps of his reports (aṭaʾu dhikrahu),"
strike the targets of eloquence and pithiness both. He means that "I
kept receiving word of God's Messenger from when I started out until I
reached this location." He expressed this meaning through this marvelous
allusion. 1.234 From an oration by ʿAlī discussing the two arbitrators
and censuring the Syri- ans:4 They are uncouth riffraff and vile
bondsmen gathered from every shore and gleaned from every rabble, who
need to be taught, disciplined, instructed, trained, supervised, and
restricted in their doings. They belong neither to the Emigrants nor the
Allies who made their homes in Medina. Hark and listen! The Syrians have
selected the person who is closest to what they love, while you have
selected the person who is closest to what you hate. You have
experienced ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays (Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī)! Just yesterday, he
was saying to you, "This is sedition---cut your bowstrings and sheathe
your swords!" If he was right then, he is wrong in marching with us
today, but if he was wrong then---and he was---he deserves to be viewed
with suspicion. Strike ʿAmr ibn 1 I have translated this differently
than Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd and Baḥrānī (Ḥ13:24--25; B 682), who state that
"making special (khaṣaṣta)" and "making common (ʿamamta)" both refer to
the grief of the Prophet's passing: with their interpretation, I find
the next phrase---"that you comforted us against the loss of any
other"---difficult to understand. Rāwandī (R 2:415) states that the two
phrases refer to the manner of the Prophet's life and death. 2 An
additional six orations---perhaps added by Raḍī, or by others---are
transcribed in some of our primary and secondary manuscripts (further
details in the Edition's footnotes, and in Note on the Edition and
Translation) 3 Details of ʿAlī's role in Muḥammad's migration in B 778;
Ḥ13:303--306, after Ibn Isḥāq, Mag- hāzī. 4 Presumably in Ṣiffīn, in
37/657, after the Syrians asked for arbitration. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 526 Text
and Translation .ةمهتلاهتمزلدقفاًبذاكناكنإوهركتسمريغهريسمبأطخأدقفاً
قداصناكنإف.مكفويساوميشو فٱدفعوا في صدر عمرو بن العاص بعبد الله بن العبّاس
وخذوا مُه َ ل الأيّام وحوطوا قواصي الإسلام ألا ترون إلى بلاد .ىمرُ ت مكتافَص
ىلإو ىزغُ ت مك 1.235ومن خطبة له عليه السلام يذ كر فيها آل محمّد عليهم
السلام هم عيش العلم وموت الجهل يخـبر كم حلمهم عن علمهم وصمتهم عن حُكم
منطقهم لا يخالفون الحقّ ولا يختلفون فيه. هم دعائم الإسلام وولائج الاعتصام
بهم عاد الحقّ في ن ِ صابه وٱنزاح
الباطلعنمَقامهوٱنقطعلسانهمنمَنبِتهعقلواالدينعقلوعايةورعايةلاعقلسَماعورواية.
وإنّ رواة العلم كثير ورعاته قليل. 1.236ومن خطبة له عليه السلام فٱعملوا
وأنتم في نفَس البقاء والصحف ُ منشورةٌوالتوبة مبسوطة والمدبر ي ُ دعى
والمسيء يرجى قبلأنيَخم َ دالعملوينقطعالمهلوتنقضيالمدّةويسدّ
بابالتوبةوتصعدالملائكة.فأخذٱمرؤ من نفسه لنفسه وأخذ من حيّ لميّت ومن فانٍ
لباقٍ ومن ذاهب لدائم. ٱمرؤ خاف الله وهو معمّر إلى أجله ومنظور إلى عمله.
ٱمرؤ أَلْج َ م نفسه بل ِ نع اهماجلب اهكسمأف اهمامزب اه َ ّمَزو اهماج معاصي
الله وقادها بزمامها إلى طاعة الله. 1.237ومن كلام له عليه السلام يحث ّ
فيه أصحابه على الجهاد والله ُمُستأديكم شكر َ ه ومورثكم أمره وممهلـكم في
مِضمار ممدود لتتنازعوا سَبْقَه فشُدّوا عُقَد المآزر وأَوطِؤوا )أو: وٱط ْ وُوا( فضول
الخواصر. لا تجتمع عزيمة ووليمة. وما أنقض النوم لعزائم اليوم وأمحى الظلَم
لتذاكير الهمم. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 1: Orations
527 al-ʿĀṣin the chest with ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās! Take advantage of
the respite granted by these days and protect the borders of Islam!
Don't you see your lands under attack, your ramparts under siege? 1.235
From an oration by ʿAlī in which he speaks of the Prophet's family: They
are the life of knowledge and the death of ignorance. Their forbearance
stems from their knowledge, and their silence from the wisdom of their
speech. They never go against what is right and never differ in it. They
are the pillars of Islam and the doors to the halls of protection. It is
through them that right has returned to its home, wrong has been
displaced from its residence, and its tongue has been excised at the
root. They have assimilated religion with understanding and mindful
attention, not by rote learning and narration. There are many narrators
of hadith,1 but those who tend to it mindfully are rare. 1.236 From an
oration by ʿAlī: Act while you still possess the breath of life, while
registers are open and repentance is extended, while one who turns away
is invited back and one who sins is asked to desist, before action is
extinguished, the respite is cut short, the interlude ends, the door of
repentance is shut, and the angels ascend. Let each man gather
provisions by himself, for himself, by the self that is living for the
self that will soon be dead, by the self that will perish for the self
that will remain, by the self that will depart, for the self that will
abide. Such a man fears God during his allotted span, while he is given
time to act. Such a man places a bridle and halter on his sentient soul.
He curbs it with this bridle from acts of disobedience to God and leads
it with the halter toward acts of obedience to God. 1.237 From an
address by ʿAlī urging his supporters to jihad:2 God has required you to
thank him, given you his command, and a lengthy respite to prepare for
the race so that you may compete and win. Tighten your belts and lose
your belly fat, for resolve and feasting never come together. How
completely does sleep destroy resolutions made in the day! How
completely does darkness erase the memory of high aspirations! 1 Lit.
"knowledge," ʿilm; in early Islamic times, the word usually referred to
religious knowledge, and often specifically to the Prophet Muḥammad's
teachings. 2 Presumably in Kufa, after the arbitration in 37/658.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 528 Text and
Translation
1.238منكلاملهعليهالسلامقالهلعبداللهبنالعبّاسرضياللهعنهماوقدجاءهبرسالةمن ُ
بْنَ يِ ب هلام ىلإ جورخلا اهيف هلأسي روصحم وهو ناّفع نب نامثع ع ليقلّ هتف
الناس بٱسمه للخلافة بعد أن كان سأله مثل ذلك من قبل. فقال عليه السلام
ياٱبنعبّاسمايريدعثمانأنيجعلنيإلّاجمل ً ّمثجرخٱنأّيلإثعب.رِ بدُأولِبقُأبرغلاباً
حضانا بعثإليّأنٱقدمثمّهوالآنيبعثإليّأنٱخرج.واللهلقددفعتعنهحتّىخشيتأنأكون .اً
مثآ آخر الخطب. ويتلوه المختار من كتبه ورسائله.١ ١م: كذا. ش: ⟩تمّت
المختارات من خطب أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ويتلوه باب المختارات من
كتبهوصل ّ ىاللهعلىمحمّدوآلهالطيّبين⟨.ن،ي،ھ:سقطالتعليق. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
1: Orations 529 1.238 From words ʿAlī spoke to ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-ʿAbbās1---Ibn al-ʿAbbās had brought ʿAlī a missive from ʿUthmān ibn
ʿAffān, who was under siege, asking him to depart for his estate in
Yanbuʿ al-Nakhl, hoping this would stop people calling out ʿAlī's name
for the caliphate; ʿUthmān had made the same demand of ʿAlī earlier.
ʿAlī responded to Ibn al-ʿAbbās:
Ibnal-ʿAbbās!ʿUthmānwishestomakemeacameldrawingwaterwithapulley,con-
stantly going forward and back! He insisted that I leave, then sent for
me to return, and now he has again sent you with instructions for me to
leave! By God, I have defended him until I feared I was sinning! This is
the end of the section on orations. It is followed by selections from
ʿAlī's letters and epistles. 1 In Medina, 35/656. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 باب
المختار من كتب أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ورسائله إلى أعدائه وأمراء بلاده
ويدخل في ذلك ما ٱختير من عهوده إلى عمّاله ووصاياه لأهله وأصحابه 2.1من
كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أهل الـكوفة عند مسيره من المدينة إلى البصرة من
عبد الله عليّ أمير المؤمنين إلى أهل الـكوفة جبهة الأنصار وسنام العرب. أمّا
بعد. فإن ّ ي أخبر كم عن أمر عثمان حتّى يكون سمعهكعِيانه. إنّ الناس طعنوا
عليه فكنت رجل ً ا من المهاجرين أُكثر ٱستعتابه وأُقلّ عتابه وكان طلحة
والزبير أهوَن سَيرهما فيه هولتقف موق هل حيتأف بضغ ةتلَ ف هيف ةشئاع نم ناكو
فينعلا امهئادِح قفرأو فيجولا دق ةرجهلا راد ّنأ اوملعٱو .نيرَ ّيـخم نيعئاط
لب نيرَ بـجُم الو نيهركتسم ريغ سانلا ينعيابو al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera
Qutbuddin, 2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_005c This is an open access
chapter distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. 2
Letters Chapter containing selections from the Commander of the
Faithful's dis- patches and letters to his enemies and his regional
governors, including selections from instructions to his tax collectors
and testaments to his family and companions 2.1 From ʿAlī's dispatch to
the residents of Kufa, when he was about to march from Medina on Basra:1
From God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, to the residents of
Kufa--- renowned face of the Allies, crest of the Arabs.2 And now to the
matter at hand: I write to inform you of what happened to ʿUthmān, and
when you hear my words,3 you will see the events unfold before your
eyes: The public censured ʿUthmān for his conduct, and the Emigrants
each took their stand. I tried hard to reconcile and lower the heat,
while Ṭalḥah and Zubayr galloped to escalate the affair, harshly driving
the camels of castigation toward their destination, and ʿĀʾishah fired
out an angry outburst.4 A group, emboldened, killed ʿUth- mān. The
Muslims then pledged allegiance to me as their caliph, willingly and of
their free choice, without any coercion or force. Kufans, know that
Medina 1 Sent with Ḥasan and ʿAmmār in 36/656, from Rabadhah, 200km to
the NE of Medina, soon after ʿAlī's accession to the caliphate, on his
way to confront ʿĀʾishah, Ṭalḥah, and Zubayr, who had rebelled and
marched to Basra to garner military support (Mufīd, Jamal, 131--132).
See also Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd's (Ḥ14:8--21) "Accounts of ʿAlī's march on
Basra, and his letters to the residents of Kufa." See also comments on
ʿĀʾishah's, Ṭalḥah's, and Zubayr's later repentance, according to this
Sunni-Muʿtazilī account (Ḥ14:24--25). 2 "Allies" (Anṣār) here refers
either to (1) the Medinese Allies, of which there was a small but
discrete section in Kufa in the earliest time of its settlement
(cf. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:44--45); or (2) ʿAlī's allies more generally
(Ḥ14:6; R 3:12). "Crest," lit. "camel's hump (sanām)." 3 Note that ʿAlī
writes, "When you hear my words." At this time, and for some centuries
there- after, official state letters and proclamations were read out to
the populace in the mosque or other public space. Similarly, in §2.73. 4
WhenʿUthmānstoodupinthemosquetryingtoappeasethepublic,ʿĀʾishahreportedlyspoke
harshly from behind a curtain, and she displayed a pair of the Prophet's
slippers, shouting that ʿUthmān had "changed the Prophet's religion,
when the Prophet's slippers had not even worn out" (B 785). ʿĀʾishah
reportedly called out to the people of Medina to "Kill the Long- beard
(naʿthal)!" ʿUthmān's nickname (R 3:13). Unusually, ʿAlī calls her out
by name in this letter, presumably due to the very real and imminent
danger she posed in that moment. In the aftermath of the battle, he used
the generic "woman/women" to allude to her: §1.13, §1.77, §1.151.3,
§1.154.1. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 532 Text and
Translation َ لَ ق عَت ِ لُ قواهلهأب ْ ىلإاوعرسأفبطقلاىلعةنتفلاتماقولجرِ
ملاشيجتشاجواهباوع أمير كم وبادروا جهاد عدوّكم إن شاء الله. 2.2ومن كتاب له
عليه السلام إليهم بعد فتح البصرة وجزاكم الله من أهل مصرٍ عن أهل١ بيت
نبيّكم أحسن ما يجزي العاملين بطاعته والشاكرين لنعمته فقد سمعتم وأطعتم
ودعيتم فأجبتم. 2.3ومنكتابكتبهعليهالسلاملش ُ رَيحبنالحارثقاضيه.رويأنّ
شريحبنالحارثقاضي اً حيرش ىعدتسٱف كلذ مالسلا هيلع هغلبف اًرانيد نينامثب
اًراد هدهع ىلع ىرتشٱ نينمؤملا ريمأ
وقاللهبلغنيأنّكٱبتعتدارًابثمانيندينارًاوكتبتكتابًاوأشهدتشهودًا.فقالشريحقدكان
ذلك يا أمير المؤمنين. قال فنظر إليه نظر مُغضَب ثمّقال له يا شريح أما إنّه
سيأتيك من لا ينظر في كتابك ولا يسألك عن بيّنتك حتّى يُخرجك منها ريغ نم
رادلا هذه تعتبٱ نوكت ال حيرش اي رظنٱف .اًصلاخ كربق ىلإ كمّ لسيو اًصخاش ماِلكَ
أو نقدت الثمن من غير حِلٍّ لك٢ فإذا أنت قد خسرت دار الدنيا ودار الآخرة. أما
إنّك لو كنت أتيتني عند شرائك ما ٱشتريت لـكتبت لك كتابًا على هذه النسخة فلم
ترغب في شراء هذه الدار بدرهم فما فوقه. والنسخة
هذاماٱشترىعبدذليلمنميّتقدأُزعجللرحيلٱشترىمنهدارًامندارالغرورمن جانب الفانين
وخِطّة الهالـكين. وتجمع هذه الدار حدودٌ أربعة الحدّ الأوّل ينتهي إلى
دواعيالآفاتوالحدّالثانيينتهيإلىدواعيالمصيباتوالحدّالثالثينتهيإلىالهوى
اذهىرتشا.رادلاهذهبابعَرشُ يهيفويوغملاناطيشلاىلإيهتنيعبارلا ّدحلاويدرملا
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ:سقطت ⟩أهل⟨. ٢م،ي،ومصحّحة
فيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩منغيرحلالك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 533
reels, and its people reel with it.1 It boils like a cauldron and revolt
has raised its banner, so hasten to join your ruler and advance to fight
your enemy! Battle, if that be God's will, looms ahead. 2.2 From ʿAlī's
dispatch to the residents of Kufa, after his victory at Basra:2
Residents of Kufa, may God reward you on behalf of your Prophet's
family! May he bestow on you the reward he reserves for those who obey
him through their actions and thank him for his favors! You heard and
you obeyed, you were called, and you answered. 2.3 From a missive that
ʿAlī wrote to his judge, Shurayḥibn al-Ḥārith. It is related that during
ʿAlī's reign, Shurayḥibn al-Ḥārith, a judge appointed by the Commander
of the Faithful, purchased a house for eighty gold dinars. The news
reached ʿAlī, who sum- moned Shurayḥand said, "I'm told that you have
bought a house for eighty gold dinars, and that you wrote up a contract
and called witnesses to attest to the purchase." Shu- rayḥresponded,
"That is correct, Commander of the Faithful." ʿAlī looked at Shurayḥ
with some anger, then said to him:3 Shurayḥ, soon there will come to you
one who will not look at your written con- tract nor ask for your
testimonials but will turn you out of your house and over to your grave.
Take heed, Shurayḥ! You had better not have bought this house with money
that doesn't belong to you or in coin gained from unlawful sources. If
so, you will have lost the abode of this world and the abode of the
hereafter. If you had come to me when you were about to buy the house, I
would have writ- ten up a different kind of contract, in this manner.
You would not then have wished to purchase this house for a single
silver dirham, let alone for the sum you paid. The transcript: This is
what a humble servant has bought from a soon-to-be-dead man whose
departure from the world has already begun. The humble servant bought
from the soon-to-be-dead man one of the houses of calamity located in
the district of those soon-to-perish in the quarter of the dead. There
are four borders to this house: The first extends to the summons of
calamity, the second extends 1 "Medina," lit. "The Home of Migration"
(dār al-hijrah; Ḥ14:8; B 785; R 3:15). Rāwandī (R 3:15) states it could
also refer to "Kufa, to which ʿAlī migrated," which appears incorrect,
as ʿAlī set- tled there only after the Battle of the Camel. 2
In36/656,inBasra,followingtheBattleof
theCamel,sentwithʿAmribnSalamahal-Hamdānī al-Arḥabī. The Kufans had been
the mainstay of ʿAlī's army. Full letter in Mufīd, Jamal, 216, after
Wāqidī. 3 Shurayḥserved as judge in Kufa during ʿAlī's reign,
35--40/656--661. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 534 Text and
Translation يف لوخدلاو ةعانقلا ّزع نم جورخلاب رادلا هذه لجألاب جَعزُ ملا
اذه نم لمألاب ّرتغملا ماسجأ لِبلبُم ىلعف .كَرَد نِم ىرتشٱ اميف يرتشملا اذه
كردأ امف ةعارَ ّضلاو بلطلا ّلذ رَ يْمِحو عَ ّبـُ تو رصيقو ىرسك لثم ةنعارفلا
كلم ليزمو ةربابجلا سوفن بلاسو كولملا ومن جمع المال على المال فأكثر ومن
بنى وشيّد وزخرف ونجّد وٱدّخر وٱعتقد ونظر
بزعمهللولدإشخاصُهمجميعًاإلىموقفالعرضوالحسابوموضعالثوابوالعقابإذا ِ لاَ
نُهَرِسَخَو﴿ ءاضقلا لصفب رمألا عقو جرخ اذإ لقعلا كلذ ىلع دهش .﴾َنوُ لِطْبُ مْلا َك
من أسر الهوى وسلم من علائق الدنيا. 2.4ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى بعض
أمراء جيشه فإن عادوا إلى ظلّ الطاعة فذاك الذي نحب ّ وإن توافت١ الأمور
بالقوم إلى الشقاق
والعصيانفٱنهدبمنأطاعكإلىمنعصاكوٱستغنبمنٱنقادمعكعمّنتقاعسعنك فإنّ المتكاره
مَغيبه خير من مشهده وقعوده أغنى من نهوضه. 2.5ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى
الأشعث بن قيس وهو عامل أَذْرَب ِ يجان وإنّ عملك ليس لك بطُعمة ولـكنّه في عنقك
أمانة وأنت مُسترعًى لمن فوقك ليس لك أن ت َ فتات َ في رعيّة ولا تخاطر إلّا
بوثيقة وفي يديك مال من مال الله عزّ وجلّ وأنت ّ لعَ لو ّيلإ همّ لست ىّتح
يناّزخ نم ي ألّا أكون شرّولاتك لك. والسلام. ١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم:
⟩تراقت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 535
to the summons of catastrophe, the third extends to destructive
passions, and the fourth extends to Satan, the great deceiver. The door
of this house opens from this side. This man, deceived by false hopes,
has bought this house from that man, who is soon to be evicted by death.
The buyer has left the protec- tive might of contentment and entered the
shameful condition of petition and entreaty---he has not purchased
anything good. Might belongs to God, who decomposes the bodies of kings,
snatches the souls of pharaohs, destroys the empire of despots such as
Chosroes, Caesar, Tubbaʿ, and Ḥimyar, rulers who
amassedwealth,whoconstructed,fortified,decorated,furnished,hoarded,and
stockpiled, thinking they were providing for their children. When the
com- mand comes for the final judgment, all will be forced to the dock
of review and reckoning, the station of reward and punishment, «and
there shall the falsifiers lose everything.»1 This contract has been
witnessed by an intellect liberated from the shackles of passion and
protected from worldly attachments. 2.4 From ʿAlī's dispatch to one of
his army commanders:2 If they reenter the canopy of obedience, then that
is what we desire. But if their
affairsdirectthemtodissentanddisobey,thenriseupwiththosewhoobeyyou to
fight those who disobey, make do with those who accept your leadership,
without seeking the help of the recalcitrant. One who marches against
his will is better absent than present. He is more helpful to us sitting
than standing. 2.5 From ʿAlī's dispatch to al-Ashʿath ibn Qays, his
governor in Azerbaijan:3 Your governorship is not a meal for you to
devour but a trust to which your neck is shackled. You have been charged
with taking care of it by a man who is supe- rior to you in rank, and
are not authorized to order your subjects around, or to imperil their
funds---those must be secured. What you have in your hands is property
belonging to God---you have been entrusted with safeguarding it and
submitting it to me. Rest assured, however, that I shall be one of the
kinder rulers you encounter.4 Go in peace. 1 Qurʾan, Ghāfir 40:78. 2
Excerpt from dispatch to ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf, governor of Basra, when
many residents had turned away from their sworn pledge to ʿAlī, after
ʿĀʾishah, Ṭalḥah, and Zubayr marched there in the lead-up to the Battle
of the Camel in 36/656. B 787. 3 Excerpt from letter to Ashʿath
following the Battle of the Camel in 36/656, when Ashʿath seized 100,000
dirhams from the treasury. Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 20; B 787; Ḥ14:34,
also records preceding lines of the text. 4 Lit. "I shall not be the
worst of rulers you encounter." The line is meant to placate. B 787; Ḥ
14:34. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 536 Text and
Translation 2.6ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية إنّه بايعني القوم الذين
بايعوا أبا بكر وعمر وعثمان على ما بايعوهم عليه فلم يكن للشاهد أن يختار
ولا للغائب أن يردّ وإنّما الشورى للمهاجرين والأنصار فإن ٱجتمعوا على رجل
وسمّوه إمامًا كان ذلك لله رضًى فإن خرج من أمرهم خارج بطعن أو بدعة رَدّوه إلى
ما خرج منه فإن أبى قاتلوه على ٱتّباعه غير سبيل المؤمنين وولّاه الله ما تول
ّ ى. ولعمري يا معاوية لئن نظرت بعقلك دون هواك لتجدن ّ ي أبرأ الناس من دم
عثمان ولتعلمنّ أن ّ ي كنت في عزلة عنه إلّا أن تتجنّى فت َ َ ب ام َ ّنَج دا
لك. والسلام. 2.7ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إليه أيضًا ءوسب اهتيضمأو كلالضب
اهَتقّمـَ ن ةرَ ّبـحم ةلاسرو ةل َ ّصَوُم ةظعوم كنم ينتتأ دقف .دعب اّمأ
رأيك.وكتاب ٱمرئ ليس له بصر يهديه ولا قائد يرشده قد دعاه الهوى فأجابه
وقاده الضلال فٱتّبعه فهجر لاغطًا وضلّ خابطًا. منه لأنّها بيعة واحدة لا يثنّى
فيها النظر ولا ي ُ ستأن َ يّورُ ملاو نعاط اهنم جراخلا رايِخلا اهيف ف فيها
مُداهن. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 537
2.6 From ʿAlī's letter to Muʿāwiyah:1 The same people who pledged
allegiance to Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, and ʿUthmān pledged allegiance to me, and
they did so on the same basis.2 Those who were
presentdidnothavetherighttochoose,andthoseabsentdidnothavetheright to
object---consultation is reserved for the Emigrants and Allies alone,
and if
theyagreeonsomeoneandnamehimtheirleader,thenthatisGod'swill.After- ward,
if a person secedes from the consensus with accusations and excuses,
they should compel him to return. If he refuses, they should fight him,
for he has strayed from the path of believers, and God will shun him for
as long as he continues his recalcitrance. By my life, Muʿāwiyah, if you
would look with your mind and not your passion, you would find me of all
people to have the least share of blame in the matter of ʿUthmān's
blood, you would know that I kept away from the fray. Unless you insist
on making a patently false accusation---if so, then go ahead and accuse
me of what you will! Go in peace. 2.7 From another letter sent by ʿAlī
to Muʿāwiyah:3 I have received from you a string of advice, enclosed in
an embroidered epistle, embellished with your misguidance, and
dispatched by your specious views. It is the letter of a man with no
perception to direct him and no guide to show him the way, a man who
answered the call of his passions, who was led by the reinsof
misguidance,adeliriousmanwhoramblesandblundersfromthepath. From the same
letter: The pledge of allegiance happens once. It is not open to
reconsideration or a second round of selection. One who breaks the
pledge is an aggressor, one who holds back and wavers is a traitor. 1
One of ʿAlī's earliest letters to Muʿāwiyah following the Battle of the
Camel, sent from Kufa to Damascus in 36/656 with Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh
al-Anṣārī. Full text and context in Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 28--30.
Further details of Jarīr's embassy to Muʿāwiyah in Damascus as ʿAlī's
envoy, and related events and letters, in Ḥ3:74--91; Jarīr's prior
dealings with ʿAlī in Ḥ3:70--74. 2 The Sunni Muʿtazilī commentator
(Ḥ14:35) takes these lines to endorse the validity of the people
selecting a caliph. The Shiʿi commentators (B 787; R 3:18) say ʿAlī used
this argument here, rather than citing the Prophet's designation (naṣṣ)
of himself, because it was what his addressees were more likely to
accept. 3 Excerpt from letter in response to Muʿāwiyah's, (1) sent from
Kufa, while ʿAlī's envoy Jarīr was in Damascus in 36/656, persuading
Muʿāwiyah to give the pledge of allegiance to ʿAlī (Min- qarī, Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 57--58; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 300--303); and/or (2) written in
Ṣiffīn, toward the end of the battle, in 37/657 (Ḥ14:42--43, includes
text of Muʿāwiyah's letter, and ʿAlī's full response; B 788). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 538 Text and
Translation 2.8ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى جرير بن عبد الله الب َ ةيواعم
ىلإ هلسرأ اّ ملّيلَج نيب هرِّيَخّمث مْزَ جلا رمألاب هذخو لصفلا ىلع ةيواعم لمحٱف
يباتك كاتأ اذإف .دعب اّمأ حرب مُجلية أو سِلم مُخزية فإن ٱختار الحرب فٱنبذ
إليه وإن ٱختار السلم فخذ بيعته. والسلام. 2.9ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى
معاوية فأراد قومنا قتل نبيّنا وٱجتياح أصلنا وهمّوا بنا الهموم وفعلوا بنا
الأفاعيل ومنعونا العَذْب وأَحلسونا الخوف وٱضطرّونا إلى جبل وَعْر وأوقدوا لنا
نار الحرب فعزم الله لنا على الذب انرفاكو رجألا كلذب يغبي انُ نمؤم هتمرح
ءارو نم يمرلاو هتزوح نع ّ يحامي عن الأصل ومن أسلم من قريش خِلْوٌ ممّا نحن
فيه بحِلْف يمنعه أو عشيرة تقوم دونه فهم من القتل بمكان أمن. وكان رسول الله
صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله إذا ٱحمرّ البأس وأحجم الناس قدّم أهل بيته فوقى بهم
أصحابه حرّ السيوف والأسنّة. فقُتل عبيدة بن الحارث يوم بدر وقتل حمزة يوم أحد
وقتل جعفر يوم مؤتة وأراد من لو شئت ذ كرت ٱسمه مثل الذي أرادوا من الشهادة
ولـكنّ آجالهم عجّلت ومنيّته يتلا يتقباسكهل نكي ملو يمدقب عسي مل نم يب نرقي
ترص ذإ رهدلل اً بجع ايف .ترّخأ لا يدلي أحد بمثلها إلّا أن يدّعي مدّعٍ ما لا
أعرفه ولا أظنّ الله يعرفه. والحمد لله على كلّ حال. وأمّا ما سألت من دفع
قتلة عثمان إليك فإن ّ ي نظرت في هذا الأمر al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 539 2.8 From ʿAlī's missive to Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Bajalī,
his emissary to Muʿāwiyah:1 When you receive my letter, tell Muʿāwiyah
that he must take a final deci- sion and give a binding response. Then
ask him to choose between a war that displaces or a settlement that
disgraces. If he chooses war, then dissolve the covenant of peace and
fling that threat at him. If he chooses to settle, then make him give me
the pledge of allegiance. Go in peace. 2.9 From ʿAlī's letter to
Muʿāwiyah:2 Our tribe decided to kill our Prophet and extirpate our
root. They came at us with evil intentions and spiteful actions, denying
us the sweetness of life, throwing over us a blanket of fear, forcing us
into the rugged mountains, and kindling the flames of war. But God
willed that we should protect the enclosure of
hisreligionandshielditssanctityfrompiercingarrows.Thoseof uswhowere
believers did so in the hope of God's reward, and those who were
unbelievers acted in defense of their kin. Muslims from other clans of
Quraysh---protected by a pact or by kin---were not exposed to our
hardships but were protected from lethal assault. Whenever red flames of
battle blazed, moreover, whenever the Muslims drew back in fear, the
Messenger would send men of his own fam- ily to the front, and, through
them, he would shield his Companions from the heat of swords and spears.
ʿUbaydah ibn al-Ḥārith was killed at the Battle of Badr, Ḥamzah was
killed at the Battle of Uḥud, Jaʿfar was killed at the Battle of Muʾtah.
Another man---and I could name him if I wished---sought to attain
martyrdom just as they did, but their deaths were decreed early, while
his was deferred.3 What a strange age we live in, when I am placed on
the same level as men who have not raced out in front, who do not
possess my precedence! If any man were to make this, or any similar
claim, they would be claiming a status I do not recognize, nor, I
believe, does God. But God deserves praise in every situation. You
demand that ʿUthmān's killers be handed over---I have looked 1 From Kufa
to Damascus, 36/656, between the Battle of the Camel and Ṣiffīn.
Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 55. 2 In response to Muʿāwiyah's letter sent
with Abū Muslim al-Khawlānī before the Battle of
Ṣiffīn,in36/656,inwhichMuʿāwiyahaccusedʿAlīof
envyingthefirstthreecaliphsandtreach- ery toward them (Minqarī, Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 85--94; Ḥ15:73--78, after Minqarī; includes text of Muʿāwiyah's
letter, and ʿAlī's full response; a lengthy account of the historical
events during the Prophet's lifetime is provided in this letter,
particularly with regard to Muḥammad's years in Mecca and the actions of
Quraysh against his family, as well as his major battles after the
migration to Medina; these are recorded from the histories of Wāqidī,
Ibn Isḥāq, and other sources in Ḥ14:52--281, end, 15:3--78; see also F
368; B 789; R 3:26--31). §2.28 is possibly another part of this letter
(B 819). 3 Referring to himself. R 3:38; Ḥ14:50; B 789. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 540 Text and
Translation فلم أره يسعني دفعهم إليك ولا إلى غيرك. ولعمري لئن لم تنزع عن
غيّك وشقاقك لتعرفنّهم عن قليل يطلبونك لا يكلّفونك طلبهم في برّ ولا بحر ولا
جبل ولا سهل إلّا .هلهأل مالسلاو .هنايقُ ل كّرسي ال روَزو هنادجو كءوسي بلط
هّنأ 2.10ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إليه أيضًا وكيف أنت صانع إذا تكشّفت عنك
جلابيب ما أنت فيه من دنيا قد تبهّجت بزينتها وخدعت بلذّتها دعتك فأجبتها
وقادتك فٱتبعتها وأمرتك فأطعتها وإنّه يوشِك أن يقفك واقف على ما لا ي ُ نجيك
منه مِج َ نّ ١ فٱقعس عن هذا الأمر وخذ أُهبة الحساب وشمّر لما قد نزل بك ولا
تمكّن الغواة من سمعك وإلّا تفعل أُعلمك ما أغفلت من نفسك فإنّك مُترَف ٌ قد أخذ
الشيطان منك مأخذه وبلغ فيك أمله وجرى منك مجرى الروح والدم. ومتى كنتم يا
معاوية ساسة الرعيّة وولاة أمر الأمّة بغير قدم سابق ولا شرف باسق ونعوذ
بالله من لزوم سوابق الشقاء. وأحذّرك أن تكون٢ متماديًا في غِرّة الأمنيّة مختلف
العلانية والسريرة. وقد دعوت إلى الحرب فدع الناس جانبًا وٱخرج إليّ وأَعْف
هرصب ىلع ىّطغملاو هبلق ىلع نيرَ ملا انّيأ ملعتل لاتقلا نم نيقيرفلا ِ فأنا
أبو حسن قاتل جدّك وخالك وأخيك شَدْخًا يوم بدر وذلك السيف معي وبذلك ّ نإو .اً
ّيبن تثدحتسٱ الو اًنيد تلدبتسٱ ام يّودع ىقلأ بلقلا ي لعلى المنهاج الذي
تركتموه طائعين ودخلتم فيه مكر َ هين. وزعمت أنّك جئت ثائرًا بعثمان ولقد
علمت ١م، ي، ھ، ومصحّحة في ش: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ونسخة في م، ھ: ⟩مُنْج ٍ ⟨. ٢م،
ي، ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ:سقطت ⟩ومتىكنتم ...أنتكون⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 541
into the matter and have concluded that I am unable to hand them over to
you, or to anyone else. By my life, if you do not desist in your deceit
and dissent, you will very soon see those same men seeking you out,
saving you the trouble of seeking them out on land, or sea, or
mountains, or plains. Your search will end badly---these are visitors
you will not enjoy meeting. Peace to the deserv- ing. 2.10 From another
letter sent by ʿAlī to Muʿāwiyah:1 How will you fare when the robes with
which this world adorns herself, with whose beauty she has ensnared you,
are stripped off? She called, and you answered, she led, and you
followed, she commanded, and you obeyed. Very soon, you will face
something no shield can protect you from. Stand down from this path,
gather provisions for the final reckoning, roll up your sleeves to
prepare for life's imminent end, and do not give ear to the wicked.
Desist, or let me inform you about your own situation, a situation that
you appear not to know: You live a life of excess. Satan has had his way
with you, he has achieved his fullest hopes of you, and he now moves
inside you as your own blood and spirit. When were your family ever
rulers of the people, Muʿāwiyah, or guardians of the community's
affairs?You can claim no high honor there, no winning horse! We should
all seek refuge in God from clinging to the stakes of wretchedness! I
give you warning: Cease to be deceived by false hopes. Cease to hide
intentions that differ from your speech. You call me to war, do you?
Leave the people out of this and take the field! Meet me yourself and
spare our armies the killing! Let it be known to all which of us
possesses a blinded heart and blindfolded eyes!2 I am Abū Ḥasan, who
killed your grandfather, your uncle, and your brother in the Battle of
Badr with the cutting blow of my sword---that
sameswordiswithmetoday,andsotoothatsameheartwithwhichIshallmeet my
enemy!3 I have not changed my religion or adopted a new prophet. I walk
the path that you abandoned so willingly, that you had joined only under
com- 1 Excerpt from ʿAlī's letter to Muʿāwiyah from Kufa, in 37/657,
after Jarīr's embassy had failed, just before ʿAlī set out with an army
to Ṣiffīn---context, full text, and Muʿāwiyah's response in Minqarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 108--110; Ḥ15:86--88; ʿAlī's opening paragraph in B 790.
Similar lines in §2.64. 2 "Blinded heart" is a reference to Qurʾan,
Muṭaffifūn 83:14. 3 Ar. anā Abū Ḥasan (I am Ḥasan's father), i.e., I am
ʿAlī; it was common to refer to use a fil- ionymic ("father of X") to
address individuals; see also §2.18. At the Battle of Badr, ʿAlī had
killed Muʿāwiyah's maternal grandfather, ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah, his
maternal uncle Walīd ibn ʿUtbah, and his brother Ḥanẓalah ibn Abī
Sufyān. B 792; R 3:31; F 369. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 542 Text and
Translation ّ نأكف اً بلاط تنك نإ كانه نم هبلطٱف نامثع مد عقو ثيح ي قد
رأيتك تضجّ من الحرب إذا عضّتك ضجيج الجِمال بالأثقال وكأن ّ ي بجماعتك تدعوني
جزعًا من الضرب المتتابع والقضاء الواقع ومصارع بعد مصارع إلى كتاب الله وهي
كافرة جاحدة أو مبايعة حائدة. 2.11ومن وصيّة له وصّى بها عليه السلام جيشًا
بعثه إلى العدوّ فإذا نزلتم بعدوّ أو نزل بكم فليكن معسكر ُ بُ ق يف مك ل
الأشراف أو سِفاح الجبال أو أثناء اولعجٱو نينثٱ وأ هجو نم مكتلتاقم نكتلو ا
ً ّدَرَم مكنودو اًءدِر مكـل نوكت اميك راهنألا لـكم رقباء في صَياصي الجبال
وبمناكب اله ِ ضاب لئلّا يأتيكم العدوّ من مكان مخافة أو أمن وٱعلموا أنّ
مقدّمة القوم عيونهم وعيون المقدّمة طلائعهم وإيّاكم والتفرّق فإذا نزلتم
فٱنزلوا جميعًا وإذا ٱرتحلتم فٱرتحلوا جميعًا وإذا غشيكم الليل فٱجعلوا
الرماح كِفّة ولا تذوقوا النوم إلّا غِرارًا أو مضمضة. 2.12فالآ ةثالث يف ماشلا
ىلإ هذفنأ نيح ّيحايِّرلا سيق نب لِقْعَ مل مالسلا هيلع هتّيصو نمو مقدّمة له اتّق
الله الذي لا بدّ لك من لقائه ولا منتهى لك دونه ولا تقاتلنّ إلّا من قاتلك وس
ِ ر اًماقُمهرّدقواً نكسهلعجهللا ّنإفليللالّوأرستالوريسلايفهِّفَروسانلابرِّوَغونيَدْرَ
بلا رجفني نيح وأ رَحسلا ٢حطتني نيح ١تفقو اذإف كرهظ حّورو كندب هيف حِرَأف اً
نعظ ال ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م:⟩وافقت⟨. ٢م،ي،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش:⟩ينبطح⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 543
pulsion.1 You claim to seek vengeance for ʿUthmān---you know well who
was responsible for shedding ʿUthmān's blood, so seek vengeance there if
you wish! I can see you now, mauled by battle, screaming like a camel
grumbling under a heavy load. I can see your faction panicked by
unrelenting sword strikes, by the descent of fate, by death after death,
inviting me, ironically, to follow the Qurʾan's judgment, while you
yourselves are unbelieving deniers, or men who swore allegiance then
broke the pledge!2 2.11 From ʿAlī's instructions to a battalion he had
dispatched against the enemy:3 When you reach the enemy, or when they
reach you, set up camp just before the high ground, or on the foothills
of a mountain, or at the bend of a river, so these can serve as
protection and barrier. Attack from a single side or from two at most.
Place sentries on the horns of mountains and the shoulders of
knolls---the enemy should not be able to take you by surprise, whether
from a side you fear or even one you think is secure. Know that the eyes
of the army are its vanguard, and the eyes of its vanguard are its
scouts. Don't split up into separate groups---stay together when you set
up camp and stay together when you set off. When night descends, place
your spears in a circle around you and sip the cup of sleep only from
time to time. 2.12 From ʿAlī's instructions to Maʿqil ibn Qays
al-Riyāḥī, when he dispatched him to Syria at the head of a
three-thousand-man vanguard:4
FearGod,whomyoumustmeet,andbeyondwhomyouhavenogoal.Fightonly those who
fight you. March during the two cooler periods of the day, alight at
noon so your men can rest, and drive your camels at a comfortable pace.
Don't march in the first part of the night, for God has made it a time
for repose and ordained it as a time of quiet and calm, not as a time
for marching---so rest your body and your mounts. Then, when you rise at
the spread of dawn, at the 1
ThereferenceistoMuʿāwiyahandhisclan,whowagedwaragainsttheProphetforyears,then
accepted Islam only after the Conquest of Mecca, in 8/630, when they had
no choice. 2 Prophecy regarding the Battle of Ṣiffīn and how it would
end. Ḥ15:83. 3 Excerpt from a missive ʿAlī wrote in 36/657 from his army
camp at Nukhaylah, near Kufa, to Ziyād ibn al-Naḍr al-Ḥārithī and
Shurayḥibn Hānī, whom he had sent at the head of his vanguard to Syria.
Ziyād was commander of the contingent. Shurayḥwas commander of a
sub-contingent, and subordinate to Ziyād. B 793. Text of full letter in
Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 123--125. See also §2.13 and §2.56. 4 From Kufa
in 36/657, in the lead-up to Ṣiffīn, when ʿAlī sent Maʿqil to Mosul from
Madāʾin, both cities in Iraq, at the head of three thousand men, and
asked him to go on from there to Raqqah, in Syria, where he, ʿAlī, and
the main army would meet up with him. Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 148--149; B
794. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 544 Text and
Translation الفجر فسر على بر كة الله. فإذا لقيت العدوّ فقف من أصحابك وسطًا
ولا ت َ دْنُ من القوم كيتأي ىّتح سأبلا باهي نم دعابت مهنم دعابت الو برحلا
بشنُ ي نأ ديري نم ّوند أمري. ولا يحملنّكم سِبابهم١ على قتالهم قبل دعائهم
والإعذار إليهم. 2.13ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أميرين من أمراء جيشه وقد
أمّرت عليكما وعلى من في حيّزكما مالك بن الحارث الأشتر فٱسمعا له وأطيعا
هيلإ عارسإلا اّمع هؤطب الو هتطقس الو هنهو فاخُي ال نّمم هّنإف اً ّنَ جِمو اًعرِد
هالعجٱو أحزم ولا إسراعه إلى ما الب ُ ط ْ ءُعنه أمثل. 2.14ومن وصيّته عليه
السلام لعسكره قبل لقاء العدوّ بصفّين لاتقاتلوهمحتّىيبدؤو
كمفإنّكمبحمداللهعلىحجّةوترككمإيّاهمحتّىيبدؤو كمحجّةأخرى
لـكمعليهمفإذاكانتالهزيمةبإذناللهفلاتقتلوامدبرًاولاتصيبوامُعورًاولاتُجهزواعلى
جريح. ولا تَهيجوا النساء بأذًى وإن شَتَمْنَ أعراضكم وسببن أمراءكم فإنّهن ضعيفات
فكـلابرمؤنلاّ نكنإلوقعلاوسفنألاوىوقلا ّ عنهنّ وإنّهنّ لمشركاتوإنكانالرجل
ليتناول المرأة في الجاهليّة بالفِهر أو اله ِ راوة في ُ ُ بِقَعو اهب رَ ّيع ه
من بعده. 2.15وكان عليه السلام يقول إذا لقي العدوّ محاربًا اللّٰهمّ إليك أفضت
القلوب ومُدّت الأعناق وشخصت الأبصار ون ُ قلت الأقدام وأُنضيتالأبدان.اللّٰهمّ
قدصَرّحمكتوم٢الشنآنوجاشتمَراجِلالأضغان.اللّٰهمّ إنّا ١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩شنآنهم⟨.
٢م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ش،ن، وأصلھ،ونسخةفيم: ⟩مكنون⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 545
break of day, march forward with God's blessing. When you meet the
enemy, stand at the center of your men. Don't allow your army to draw so
near to the enemy that they fear you are on the verge of battle, but
don't stay so far away
fromthemthattheythinkyoufeartheirattack.Waitonmyfurtherorders.Don't let
their insults incite you to begin the fight before you have called on
them to make peace and exhausted your pleas. 2.13 From ʿAlī's missive to
two of his army commanders:1 I have appointed Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith
al-Ashtar over both of you and over all those under your command. Listen
to him and obey his orders, consider him your armor and shield. He is a
person from whom neither weakness nor error is to be feared---he will
not delay when speed is of the essence, nor hasten when measured steps
are called for. 2.14 From ʿAlī's instructions to his army just before
confronting the enemy at Ṣiffīn:2 Don't attack them unless they attack
you first. Praise God, you already pos- sess proof of righteousness, and
waiting until they begin the fighting will be yet another proof against
them and in your favor. If we defeat the enemy--- and with God's
permission, we shall!---then don't kill those who flee, don't strike the
unarmed, and don't bear down on the wounded. Don't threaten or hurt
women, even if they insult your honor or abuse your leaders, for women
are weak in strength, spirit, and mind, and we were commanded not to
hurt them even when they were unbelievers. Even in the Age of Ignorance,
if a man struck a woman with as much as a pebble or a small stick, he
was held in shame for his act evermore, and so too were his descendants
after him. 2.15 ʿAlī would offer this supplication whenever he met his
enemy on the battlefield:3 God, it is to you that our hearts flow, our
necks stretch, our eyes are raised, and
ourfeetmove.Itisfromtheswiftnessof ourjourneytoyouthatourbodieshave 1
The two commanders are Ziyād ibn al-Naḍr and Shurayḥibn Hānī, whom ʿAlī
sent from Kufa, at the head of his 12,000-strong vanguard, to Syria in
36/657 (see also §2.11 earlier, and §2.56 later, addressed to them). En
route, the vanguard encountered a Syrian contingent under Abū al-Aʿwar
al-Sulamī. They wrote for help to ʿAlī, who responded by sending Mālik.
Details of ʿAlī's instructions to Mālik and the incident in B 795;
Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 152--155; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:566--567 (letter at
567). 2 In 37/657, at Ṣiffīn. ʿAlī reportedly delivered this same
battle-ethics speech ahead of any mil- itary conflict. B 795. Minqarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 203--204; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:10--11. 3 Prayer at Ṣiffīn,
37/657, and elsewhere, intoned when mounting his horse for battle.
Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 231. Full version of ʿAlī's battlefield
supplication in B 796. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 546 Text and
Translation َ تْفا اَنَ ّبَر﴿ انئاوهأ تّتشتو انّودع ةرثكو انّيبن ةبيغ كيلإ وكشن
ح ْ يَ بَو اَ نَ نْيَ ب ْ نَ ق َ َ حْلاِب اَ نِمْو قِّ وَأَنت َ خَيْرُالْفَات .﴾َنيِ ـح ِ
2.16وكان يقول عليه السلام لأصحابه عند الحرب لا ت َ شت َ َ ف مكيلع ّن َ
ّد رّةٌبعدها كرّة ولا جَولة بعدها حملة. وأعطوا السيوف حقوقها ووَطّ ِنوا َ لِّطلا
برضلاو ّيسْع َ ّدلا نعطلا ىلع مكسفنأ اورُمذٱو اهعراصم بونُ جلل خْفيّ .١
وأميتوا الأصوات فإنّه أطرد للفشل. والذي فلق الحبّة وبرأ النسمة ما أسلموا
ولـكن ٱستسلموا وأسرّوا الـكفر فلمّا وجدوا أعوانًا عليه أظهروه. 2.17ومن كتاب
له عليه السلام إلى معاوية جوابًا عن كتاب منه فأمّا طلبك إليّ الشام فإن ّ ي
لم أكن لأعطيك اليوم ما منعتك أمس.٢ وأمّا ٱستواؤنا في الحرب والرجال فلست
بأمضى على الشكّ منّي على اليقين وليس أهل الشام بأحرص على الدنيا من أهل
العراق على الآخرة. وأمّا قولك إنّا بنو عبد مناف فكذلك نحن وليس أميّةكهاشم
ولا حَرْب كعبد المطّلب ولا أبو سفيان كأبي طالب ولا
المهاجركالطليقولاالصريحكاللصيقولاالمحقّ كالمبطلولاالمؤمنكالم ُ دغِل.ولبئس
الخلف خلف يتبع سلفًا هوى في نار جهنّم. وفي أيدينا ب َ عْدُ فضل النبوّة التي
أذللنا بها ةّمألا هذه هل تملسأو اًجاوفأ هنيد يف برعلا هللا لخدأ اّ ملو
.ليلذلا اهب انشعنو زيزعلا ١جميع المخطوطات الرئيسيّة: كذا. شروح الراوندي ّ
والبحرانيّ وٱبن ابي الحديد: ⟩الطلحفيّ ⟨، والمعنىواحد.
٢م،ش،ن:كذا.ي،ھ،وزيادةفيهامشش،م:أضيفت ⟩وأمّاقولكإنّ
الحربقدأكلتالعربإلّاحُشاشاتأَنْفُسٍ بقيتألاومَنأكلهالحقّ فإلىالجنّةومنأكله
الباطلفإلىالنار⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 547
become emaciated.1 God, buried rancor has surfaced today, and cauldrons
of malice simmer. God, we complain to you of our Prophet's death, our
enemies' numbers, and our community's implosion. «Lord, decide between
us and our tribesmen with truth, for you are the best conqueror.»2 2.16
ʿAlī would give his supporters these instructions ahead of battle:3
Don't hesitate to retreat then assail, to withdraw then attack. Give
your swords their due. Think of the place where your body may fall as
your home. Prepare
yourframesforpiercingspear-throwsandpowerfulsword-strikes.Deadenyour
voices, for this will drive out your fear. I swear by him who split the
grain and created the soul---your enemies have never really accepted
Islam! They had to surrender but concealed their unbelief. When they
found supporters, they revealed it again. 2.17 From ʿAlī's letter
replying to Muʿāwiyah:4 You demand Syria, but I'm not about to give you
today what I refused you yes- terday. We are not equal in war and
men---you in your state of doubt don't possess sharper perception than I
do in my certainty, and the people of Syria don't covet this world more
than the people of Iraq covet the hereafter.You say, "We are all sons of
ʿAbd Manāf"---yes, we are, but Umayyah is not the equal of Hāshim, Ḥarb
is not the equal of ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib, Abū Sufyān is not the equal of Abū
Ṭālib, the Emigrant is not like the Freedman,5 the purebred is not like
the adopted, the righteous is not like the falsifier, and the believer
is not like the closet antagonist! The worst son is one who follows his
forebears into the Fire of Gehenna! Our hands possess the honor of
prophecy, with it we brought low the mighty and raised the humble. When
God brought the Arabs in droves into 1 Lit. "It is to you that bodies
become emaciated (unḍiyat)." I have inserted, "from swift jour- neying,"
based on the literary context, which evokes a journey in which the rider
pushes his
cameltoswiftandcontinuoustravel,therebyemaciatingit---inourtext,theemaciatedcamel
signifies the rider himself. 2 Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:89. 3 At Ṣiffīn, 37/657.
Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 235--236. 4 On one of the battle-days at Ṣiffīn,
37/657. Muʿāwiyah wrote to ʿAlī at Ṣiffīn, offering him the pledge in
return for the governorship of Syria. Muʿāwiyah's letter and ʿAlī's full
reply in Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 470--471; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 258--259; B
798; R 3:47; Ḥ15:120--124, after Minqarī. 5 Freedman (ṭalīq, pl.
ṭulaqāʾ) is a derogatory term referring to those of the Quraysh,
including Muʿāwiyah's father,AbūSufyān,whoremainedtheProphet's
committedenemies until forced to capitulate upon the Muslim conquest of
Mecca. On that day, instead of forcing them into captivity according to
the standard practice, Muḥammad pardoned them and granted them their
freedom, saying, "You are freedmen." Ibn Hishām, Sīrah, 4:35; Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 3:61. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 548 Text and
Translation طوعًا و كرهًا كنتم ممّن دخل في الدين إمّا رغبةًوإمّا رهبةًعلى حين
فاز١ أهل السبق ىلع الو اً بيصن كيف ناطيشلل ّنلعجت الف .مهلضفب نولّوألا
نورجاهملا بهذو مهقبسب نفسك سبيل ً ا. 2.18ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى عبد
الله بن العبّاس رحمهما الله وهو عامله على البصرة وٱعلم أنّ البصرة مَهبِط
إبليس ومَغرِس الفتن فحادِث ْ أهلها بالإحسان إليهم وٱحلل ُ رُ ّمَ نَ ت ينغلب
دقو .مهبولق نع فوخلا ةدقع ك لبني تميم وغلظتك عليهم وإنّ بني تميم لم يغب
لهم نجم إلّا طلع لهم آخر وإنّهم لم ي ُ سب َ اً محر انب مهل ّنإو مالسإ الو
ةّيلهاج يف ٍمْغَوب اوق
ماسّةوقرابةخاصّةنحنمأجورونعلىصلتهاومأزورونعلىقطيعتها.فٱرب َ عْ أباالعبّاس
رحمك الله فيما جرى على يدك ولسانك من خير وشرّفإنّا شريكان في ذلك وكن عند
صالح ظنّي بك ولا ي َ فيلنّ رأيي فيك. والسلام. 2.19ومن كتاب له عليه السلام
إلى بعض عمّاله أمّا بعد. فإنّ دَهاقين أهل بلدك شكوا منك غلظة وقسوة وٱحتقارًا
وجفوة فنظرت فلم أَرَهم أهل ً ا لأن ي ُ ُ ي نأ الو مهكرشل اوَ ند قصَوا ويُجفَوا
لعهدهم فٱلبس لهم جِلبابًا من اللين تشوبه بطرف من الشدّة وداوِل بهم بين
القسوة والرأفة وٱمزج لهم بين التقريب والإدناء والإبعاد والإقصاء إن شاء
الله. ١م، ي، ويبدو أصل ش، ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ھ، ومصحّحة في ش،
ونسخة في م: ⟩فات⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 549
the fold of his religion, when this nation submitted to Islam, some
willingly and some by force, you were among those who did so out of
greed or fear. By that
time,thetruewinnershadalreadyattainedprecedence,andthefirstEmigrants had
already won distinction. Don't let Satan have a share in you, Muʿāwiyah,
don't show him a way to control your soul. 2.18 From ʿAlī's missive to
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, his governor in Basra:1 Know that Basra is
where Iblīs landed after his fall from grace and where the trees of
sedition have taken root, so tame its people with kindness and unravel
from their heart the knot of fear. It has reached me that you have
castigated the Tamīm tribesmen and spoken with them harshly. Know that
no star of Tamīm has ever set except that another has risen in its
place, and no one has dared to attack them either in the Age of
Ignorance or since the coming of Islam. They are our intimate kin and
our close relations---we shall be rewarded for fostering their bonds and
incur sin if we sever them. Exercise restraint, Abū al- ʿAbbās2---may
God have mercy on you!---in whatever flows from your hand or your
tongue, be it good or bad, for we are partners in this endeavor. Behave
as I hope you will behave, and don't make me change my opinion of you.
Go in peace. 2.19 From ʿAlī's missive to one of his governors:3 The
Dihqān landowners in your province have complained of your harshness,
strictness, contempt, and ill-treatment.4 I have looked into this
matter, and although I find them unworthy of being your close associates
because of their polytheism, yet they certainly do not deserve to be
alienated or to be treated harshly, for they have entered into our
compact. In dealing with them, wear a soft garment with an edge of
toughness, and alternate between strictness and compassion. Mix intimacy
and closeness with remoteness and reserve.You will do this, God willing.
1 Presumably from Kufa, soon after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656.
During that battle, the loyalties of the Tamīm tribe of Basra had been
divided, and many had fought against ʿAlī. Afterward, when ʿAlī
appointed Ibn al-ʿAbbās governor of Basra, Ibn al-ʿAbbās was harsh with
the Tamīm for this reason. Details and ʿAlī's full letter in B 801. 2
"Abū (father of) al-ʿAbbās," addressing ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās. Though
commonly known as
"Ibn(sonof)al-ʿAbbās,"ʿAbdallāhisreferredtohereinrelationtohisson,who,likeʿAbdallāh's
father, is also named al-ʿAbbās. For another use of this form of
nomenclature, see §2.10. 3 Presumably from Kufa between 37/658 and
40/661. Balādhurī (Ansāb, 2:161), Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:203), and Māmaṭīrī
(Nuzhah, 258) name the recipient as ʿAmr ibn Salamah al-Hamdānī al-
Arḥabī, ʿAlī's governor in Isfahan. 4 Ar. dihqān, pl. dahāqīn, class of
lesser nobles in early Muslim Iran. Most were Zoroastrians, while some
in northern Mesopotamia were Christians. For details, see Paul,
"Dihqān," ei3. Baḥrānī (B 801) says ʿAlī's missive refers to Zoroastrian
(Majūs) landowners. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 550 Text and
Translation 2.20ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى زياد بن أبيه وهو خليفة عامله
عبد الله بن العبّاس رحمة الله عليه على البصرة. وعبد الله عامل أمير
المؤمنين عليه السلام يومئذ عليها وعلى كور الأهواز وفارس و كرمان وإن ّ
تْنُخ كّنأ ينغلب نئل اً قداص اًمسق هللاب مسقأ ي َ من ف َ اًريبك وأ اًريغص اً ئيش
نيملسملا ءي .مالسلاو .رمألا ليئض رهظلا ليقث رفولا ليلق كعدتًةّدَش كيلع ّن َ
ّدُشَأل 2.21ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إليه أيضًا فدَع الإسراف مقتصدًا وٱذ كر في
اليوم غدًا وأمسك من المال بقدر ضرورتك وقدّم الفضل ليوم حاجتك أترجو أن
يؤتيك١ الله أجر المتواضعين وأنت عنده من المتكبّرين
وتطمعوأنتمتمرّغفيالنعيمتمنعهالضعيفوالأرملةأنيوجبلكثوابالمتصدّقين وإنّما
المرء مَجزِي ّ بما سَل َ ف وقادم على ما قدّم. والسلام. 2.22ومن كتاب له عليه
السلام إلى عبد الله بن العبّاس. كان ٱبن عبّاس يقول ما ٱنتفعت بكلام بعد
كلام رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآلهكٱنتفاعي بهذا الكلام
١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيش،ھ: ⟩يعطيك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 551 2.20 From ʿAlī's missive to Ziyād ibn Abīhi, who was
acting as deputy for ʿAlī's gover- nor ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās in Basra.
ʿAbdallāh was then ʿAlī's governor in Basra and he also had jurisdiction
over the provinces of Ahwaz, Fars, and Kirman.1 I swear this by God, in
all truth: If I hear that you have misappropriated funds from the
Muslims' treasury, whether it be a small or a large amount, I shall
inflict on you a harsh punishment that will leave you short of wealth,
dimin- ished in strength, and burdened with shame. Go in peace. 2.21
From another missive sent by ʿAlī to Ziyād:2 Turn from extravagance to
moderation, think today of tomorrow, and spend what you must, but put by
the rest for your day of want. Do you expect God to remunerate you with
the humble if he counts you among the arrogant? Do you think he will
reward you with the charitable when you wallow in luxu- ries and refuse
to help the weak and the widowed? A man is recompensed for the work he
has accomplished. He advances to meet what he sent on. Go in peace. 2.22
From ʿAlī's letter to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās. Ibn al-ʿAbbās used to
say: After the words of the Prophet, I have benefited from no words as
much as I have benefited from these:3 1 Presumably sent from Kufa to
Fars sometime in 37--38/657--658: Yaʿqūbī (Tārīkh, 2:204) pref- aces
this missive with the words, "\[ʿAlī\] wrote to Ziyād, his governor in
Fars"; Ziyād was appointed as governor there after Ṣiffīn, which was in
37/657. This text is an escalation from the earlier, relatively milder
reproof against corruption in §2.21. 2
PresumablyalsofromKufa,butearlierthan§2.20,in36/657,inthelead-uptotheBattleof
Ṣif- fīn, when ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās left his post to join ʿAlī for
preparations. ʿAlī had dispatched his freedman Saʿd to Ziyād,
instructing him to send funds to him in Kufa from the treasury of Basra;
they argued, and, presumably, Ziyād did not send the funds, which is
what prompted ʿAlī's reply. Details of the context, ʿAlī's full missive,
and Ziyād's reply, in Balādhurī, Ansāb, 2:164--165; Ḥ16:196--197, within
the commentary on §2.44. 3 Excerpt from a letter---of which §2.66 is a
variant rendering, and §2.41 and §2.72 are possibly
otherparts---likelysentfromKufatoMeccain40/661,ashortwhilebeforeʿAlī'sdeath.ʿAbdal-
lāhibnal-ʿAbbās,ʿAlī'scousinandgovernorof
BasraduringʿAlī'sreign,apparentlytookmoney for personal use from the
Basra treasury, arguing that as a member of the Prophet's family, he had
a right to the Qurʾanic "fifth" (khums) share. When ʿAlī chastised him,
he retracted his claim and returned the money. Text and context for
§2.22 and §2.66 in Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:205. The commentators also discuss
the episode under §2.41, which includes explicit mention of the affair:
Ḥ16:169--172; B 867, includes ʿAbdallāh's reply, and ʿAlī's further
reply; details are also given in Balādhurī, Ansāb, 2:169--176; Rāwandī
(R 3:134--135) argues---contra the other commentators---that the
reference is more likely to ʿAbdallāh's brother ʿUbaydallāh ibn al-
ʿAbbās. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 552 Text and
Translation أمّا بعد. فإنّ المرء يسرّه دَرَك ما لم يكن ليفوته ويسوءه فوت ما
لم يكن ليدر كه فليكن سرورك بما نلت من آخرتك وليكن أسفك على ما فاتك منها
وما نلت من دنياك فلا تكثر به فرحًا وما فاتك منها فلا تأس َ عليه جزعًا
وليكن همّك فيما بعد الموت. 2.23ةّيصولا ليبس ىلع مجلم نبٱ هبرض اّ مل هتوم
ليبق هلاق مالسلا هيلع هل مالك نمو ّ لصٌدّمحمو اً ئيش هللاب اوكرشت اّلأ مكـل
يتّيصو ى الله عليه وآله فلا تضيّعوا سنّته أقيموا هذين العمودين وخَلا كم ذمّ.
أنا بالأمس صاحبكم واليوم عبرة لـكم وغدًا مفارقكم. إن أَبْقَ فأنا وليّ دمي وإن
أَفْنَ فالفناء ميعادي وإن أَعْف ُ فالعفو لي قربة وهو لـكم حسنة فٱعفوا َ ي نَأ
َنوُ ّبِحُت اَلَأ﴿ َ ـلُ هَ ّللاَ رِفْغ ُ تهركٌدراو توملا نم ينَ ئِجَف ام هللاو .﴾ْمُك ه
ولا طالع أنكرته وما كنت إلّا كقارب .﴾ِراَرْبَأْلِّلٌرْيَخِهَ ّللاَدنِع اَمَو﴿ دجو بلاطو
درو ٍ وقد مضى بعض هذا الكلام فيما تقدّم من الخطب إلّا أنّ فيه هٰهنا زيادة
أوجبت تكريره. 2.24نيّفص نم هفرَصنم دعب اهبتكهلاومأ يف لمعُ ي امب مالسلا
هيلع هل ةّيصو نمو هذا ما أمر به عبد الله عليّبن أبي طالب أمير المؤمنين في
ماله ٱبتغاء وجه الله ليولجني به الجنّة ويعطيني الأمنة. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 553
A man is gladdened by obtaining a thing he was not going to lose and
saddened by the loss of a thing he was not going to obtain. Be glad for
what you have achieved for the hereafter. Be sad for what you have lost
of it. Whatever you achieve of this world, don't exult over it
excessively. Whatever you may lose of it, don't grieve too much. Save
your worries for what comes after death. 2.23 From ʿAlī's address after
Ibn Muljam struck him with his sword, spoken as a tes- tament just
before ʿAlī's death:1 This is my testament to you: Do not assign
partners to God or abandon the Sunnah of the Prophet---keep these two
pillars upright, and you shall be free of blame. Yesterday I was your
companion, today I serve as a plain lesson for you, and tomorrow I shall
be gone from your midst. If I survive, I shall claim my own blood-wit,2
and if I die, well, death is what we are promised. If I forgive, my
action will gain me nearness to God, and if you do the same, you too
will earnGod'sreward.Chooseforgiveness---«DoyounotwishthatGodshouldfor-
give you?»3 By God, death has not surprised me as an unwelcome visitor,
or as a sudden arrival that I find unpleasant. I am like a person who
has arrived at the watering hole he sought, who found the object he
pursued. «What God has prepared for people of virtue is the best!»4
Raḍī: Part of this address was previously recorded in the Orations
section.5This version contains some additions, which is why I have found
it necessary to repeat it here. 2.24 From a testament ʿAlī wrote after
turning back from Ṣiffīn, regarding the distri- bution of his
properties:6 This is what I---God's servant, ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib,
Commander of the Faithful--- have directed with regard to my property in
the pursuance of God's pleasure, in the hope that God will allow me
entry into the celestial garden and grant me his protection. 1 Delivered
as part of a testament in his home in Kufa, where he was carried after
he was struck the deathblow, in 40/661. Kulaynī, Kāfī, 1:299. 2
Blood-wit and forgiveness are mentioned in the context of punishment for
ʿAlī's killer, Ibn Muljam. 3 Qurʾan, Nūr 24:22. 4 Qurʾan, ʿĀl ʿImrān
3:198. 5 §1.147. 6
EnroutefromṢiffīntoKufain37/657.Fulltestamentwithlistof
transmittersandsomedetails of ʿAlī's concubines in B 806--807. Some
details of his properties in Ḥ15:149. The testament starts out in the
conventional third grammatical person, which I have changed to first
person for clarity, since the final line in Arabic is in the first
person. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 554 Text and
Translation منها
وإنّهيقومبذلكالحسنبنعليّيأكلمنهبالمعروفوينفقمنهفيالمعروففإنحدث بحسن حدث
وحسين حيّ قام بالأمر بعده وأصدره مصدره. وإنّ لٱبني فاطمة من صدقة عليّمثل
الذي لبني عليّوإن ّ ي إنّما جعلت القيام بذلك إلى ٱبني فاطمة ٱبتغاء وجه
الله وقربة إلى رسول الله صل ّ َ يو .هتلصول اًفيرشتو هتمرحل اً ميركتو هلآو
هيلع هللا ى شترِط على الذي يجعله إليه أن يترك المال على أصوله وينفق من
ثمره حيث أُمر به وهدي له وأنلايبيعمننخيل١هذهالقرىوديّةحتّىت ُ
شكِلأرضُهاغِراسًا.ومنكانمنإمائي اللاتي أطوف عليهنّ لها ولد أو هي حامل فت ُ
مسَك على ولدها وهي من حظّه فإن مات ولدها وهي حيّة فهي عتيقة قد أُفرج عنها
الرق ّ وحرّرها العتق. قوله عليه السلام في هذه الوصيّة ⟩وألّا يبيع من نخلها
وديّة⟨فإنّ الوديّة الفسيلة وجمعها وَدِي ّ .
وقوله⟩حتّىتشكلأرضهاغراسًا⟨هومنأفصحالكلاموالمرادبهأنّ الأرضيكثرفيهاغراس
النخل حتّى يراها الناظر على غير تلك الصفة التي عرفها بها في ُ شكِل عليه
أمرها ويحسبها غيرها. 2.25ومن وصيّة له عليه السلام كان يكتبها لمن يستعمله
على الصدقات وإنّما ذ كرنا منها جمل ً ا
هٰهناليعلمبهاأنّهعليهالسلامكانيقيمعمادالحقّ
ويشرعأمثلةالعدلفيصغيرالأموروكبيرها ودقيقها وجليلها 2.25.1هيلع ٢ّنَزاتحت
الو اً ملسم ّنَعِّوَرُ ت الو هل كيرش ال هدحو هللا ىوقت ىلع قلطنا كارهًا ولا
تأخذنّ منه أكثر من حقّ الله في ماله. ١ن،ش،ھ:كذا.م،ي،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩أولادنخيل⟨.
٢م،ي،ھ:كذا.ن،ش: ⟩تجتازنّ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 555
From the same testament:
Mypropertyshallbeadministeredbyal-ḤasanibnʿAlī.1Heshoulduseaportion from
it in licit ways and disburse from it also in licit ways. If something
happens to Ḥasan while Ḥusayn lives, Ḥusayn shall administer the
property thereafter and in the same way. Fāṭimah's sons are both to have
the same share from my
trustsasmyothersons,butIhaveselectedthemforthechargeof administering my
trusts in order to obtain God's pleasure, gain closeness to God's
Messen- ger, honor his sanctity, and privilege his kinship. The
administrator is to leave the property's principal in its original form
and spend only from its fruits as he has been directed and instructed.
He may not sell the estates' date-palm shoots until the entire land has
ripened with them and become a fully green planta- tion. If any of my
concubines with whom I cohabit has a child or is pregnant, then the cost
of freeing her is to be deducted from her child's share. If her child
dies and she lives, she is still free, for her bondage has already been
removed, and my freeing her has certified her liberty.2 Raḍī: As for
ʿAlī's words in this testament, "He may not sell the estates' date-palm
shoots (wadiyyah)": wadiyyaharesaplings,andthepluralis
wadī.Hiswords:"untilthelandhas ripened with them and become (an
tushkila) a green plantation" is among the most eloquent of expressions.
It means that date-palm plantings will grow with such abun-
danceinthatlandthatthebeholderwillthinkitalandscapedifferenttotheonebefore;
he will be thrown into doubt (ashkala, which also means ripen) and will
think it is a different piece of land altogether. 2.25 From a testament
ʿAlī would customarily inscribe for tax collectors he appointed to
oversee collection of the alms-levy. I have recorded some sections from
it here to show how ʿAlī raised the pillar of right and followed the
path of justice in matters small and large, and in affairs trivial and
momentous:3 2.25.1 Set out in consciousness of God, who is one and has
no partner. Don't threaten a Muslim, don't survey his property without
his consent, and don't take from his possessions more than what is due
to God. 1 This is ʿAlī's son Ḥasan from his wife Fāṭimah Zahrāʾ,
daughter of the Prophet. Following con- vention for official documents,
ʿAlī refers to him as "Ḥasan ibn (= son of) ʿAlī" rather than saying "my
son Ḥasan." 2 Translation after Ḥ15:150. 3 In Kufa, during his
caliphate, 35--40/656--661, when he sent tax collectors to agricultural
lands to collect the alms-levy (ṣadaqāt) annually required of Muslims.
Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 1:126--131. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 556 Text and
Translation 2.25.2فإذا قدمت على الحيّ فأنزل بمائهم من غير أن تخالط
أبياتهم ثمّٱمض إليهم بالسكينة والوقار حتّى تقوم بينهم فتسلّم عليهم ولا تُخدِج
بالتحيّة لهم ثمّتقول عباد الله أرسلني إليكم وليّ الله وخليفته لآخذ منكم حقّ
الله في أموالـكم فهل لله في أموالـكم من حقّ فتؤدّوه إلى وليّه. فإن قال قائل
لا فلا تراجعه وإن أنعم لك منعم فٱنطلق معه من غير أن تخيفه أو توعده أو ت
َ نإف .ةّضف وأ بهذ نم كاطعأ ام ذخف هقَهرَ ت وأ هفِسع
كانتلهماشيةأوإبلفلاتدخلهاإلّابإذنهفإنّ أكثرهالهفإذاأتيتهافلاتدخلهادخول َ
رِّفَنُ تالوهبفينعالوهيلعطّلستم نّ بهيمةولات ُ فَزِّعَنّهاولات َ سُوءَنّ
صاحبهافيها.وٱصْدَع المالصَدْعينثمّخَيِّرْه فإذاٱختارفلات َ عرِضنّ لماٱختارثمّٱصدع
الباقيصدعينثمّخيّره فإذا ٱختار فلا تعرضنّ لما ٱختار فلا تزال بذلك حتّى يبقى
ما فيه وفاء لحقّ الله في ماله فٱقبض حقّ الله منه فإن ٱستقالك فأَقِل ْ ه
ُثمّٱخلطهما ثمّٱصنع مثل الذي صنعت أوّلًا حتّى تأخذ حقّ الله في ماله. ولا تأخذنّ
عَودًا ولا هَرِمة ولا مكسورة ولا مهلوسة ولا ذات عَوار. 2.25.3ولا تأمننّ عليها
إلّا من تثق بدينه رافقًا بمال المسلمين حتّى يوصله إلى وليّهم الو فحجم الو
فِنْعُم ريغ اًظيفح اً نيمأو اًقيفش اً حصان اّلإ اهب لّكوت الو مهنيب همسقيف ملغب
ولا متعب ثمّٱحدُر إلينا ما ٱجتمع عندك ن ُ صيّره حيث أمر الله به. فإذا أخذها
اهدلوب كلذ ّرضيف اهنبل رُصمَ ي الو اهليصف نيبو ةقان نيب لوحي اّلأ هيلإ
ْزِعْوَأف كنيمأ َ يْلو بغاللا ىلعْهِّفَرُ يْلو اهنيبو كلذ يف اهتابحاوَص نيب لدعيلو
اًبوكر اهّندهجي الو ِن ْأَ تْس ّداوج ىلإ ضرألا تبن نع اهب لدعي الو رُدُغلا نم
هبّرمت ام اهدرويلو ١علاظلاو بِقَ ّنلاب الطرق وليروّحها في الساعات وليمهلها
عند النِّطاف والأعشاب حتّى تأتينا بإذن الله ١ن،ش،ي:كذا.م،ھ: ⟩الضالع⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 557
2.25.2 When you arrive in the lands of a tribe, pitch your tent at their
water- ing hole and don't enter their residential areas. Then walk
toward them calmly and with dignity and stand in their midst. Then hail
them in peace and don't stintwithyourgreeting.Thensay,"Servantsof
God,God'svicegerent,hiscaliph, has sent me to secure God's due from your
property. Is there anything you owe God from your property that you
should submit to his vicegerent?" If a per- son says no, don't ask him
again. If a person is forthcoming, set out with him, but don't frighten,
threaten, force, or oppress him---accept whatever gold or silver he
submits to you freely. If he has goats or camels, don't enter their pens
without his permission, for most of the animals belong to him. When you
do enter, don't behaverudely or with violence. Don'tfrightentheanimals
orstartle them, and don't cause the owner distress by maltreating them.
Divide the ani- mals into two groups and have the owner select one set.
When he has made his selection, don't object. Then divide the remaining
the animals again into two groups, and have the owner select one set.
When he has made his selection, don't object. Keep doing this until
God's due is fulfilled by the number of ani- mals that remain in your
share, then accept them as God's due from the owner. If, after that, he
asks you to rescind the operation, rescind it. Then bring all the
animals together once again and repeat what you had done earlier until
you have secured his acceptance of God's due from his property. Make
sure, how- ever, that you don't accept animals that are old, decrepit,
broken-boned, sickly, or defective. 2.25.3 Assign the animals only to
the care of someone you know to be pious and who will be gentle with
these flocks that belong to the Muslim community, until he delivers them
to their leader, and that leader distributes the animals among them.
Entrust the animals only to the care of someone who is kind and sincere,
a vigilant custodian who won't treat them roughly, overburden them,
fatigue them, or drive them too hard. Then hasten to send me all the
animals that have been collected under your supervision so that I may
distribute them in the manner commanded by God. When your deputy takes
charge of them, instruct him not to separate a camel from her calf, or
to milk her to the extent that it harms the calf, or to ride her so hard
that she collapses. He should divide his riding evenly between her and
her fellow mares. He should allow tired ani- mals to rest and be
unhurried in herding the animals with worn hooves or a limp. He should
let them drink whenever they pass a pool of water and not force them
from green shoots to the beaten road. He should let them have a respite
every few hours and pause wherever there is water and grass. He should
do this until he delivers the animals to me, with God's permission,
healthy and fat with marrow, neither fatigued nor distressed, so that I
may distribute them al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 558 Text and
Translation ب ُ ّ
لصهّيبنةّنسوهللاباتكىلعاهمسقنلتادوهجمالوتابَعتُمريغتايِقنُماًن َ ّد ىاللهعليه
وآله. فإنّ ذلك أعظم لأجرك وأقرب لرشدك إن شاء الله. 2.26ومن عهد له عليه
السلام في مثله إلى بعض عمّاله وقد بعثه على الصدقة 2.26.1أمره بتقوى الله
في سرائر أمره وخفيّات أعماله حيث لا شهيد غيره ولا وكيل دونه وأمره ألّا
يعمل بشيء من طاعة الله فيما ظهر فيخالف إلى غيره فيما أسرّ ومن لم يختلف
سرّه وعلانيته وفعله ومقالته فقد أدّى الأمانة وأخلص العبادة وأمره أن لا
يَجْبَه َ هم ولا ي َ عْضَهَهم ولا يرغب عنهم تفضّل ً ا بالإمارة عليهم فإنّهم
الإخوان في الدين والأعوان على ٱستخراج الحقوق. 2.26.2ةنكسم لهأ ءاكرشو
اًمولعم ا ً ّقحو اًضورفم اً بيصن ةقدصلا هذه يف كل ّنإو سانلا رثكأ نم كّنإف
اّلإو مهقوقح مهِّفَوف كّقح كوُ ّفَوُم اّنإو ةقاف يوذ ءافعضو خصومًا يوم القيامة
وبؤسًا لمن خصمه عند الله الفقراء والمساكين والسائلون والمدفوعون والغارم
وٱبن السبيل ومن ٱستهان بالأمانة ورَت َ عَ في الخيانة ولم ينزّه نفسه ودينه
عنها فقد أحلّ بنفسه في الدنيا الخزي وهو في الآخرة أذلّ وأخزى. وإنّ أعظم
الخيانة خيانة الأمّة وأفظع الغِش ّ غش ّ الأئمّة. 2.27ومن عهد له عليه السلام
إلى محمّد بن أبي بكر رحمه الله حين قل ّ ده مصر al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 559 according to God's Book and the Prophet's Sunnah. Do
this, and God willing, it will increase your reward and bring you closer
to the way of guidance. 2.26 From ʿAlī's missive to one of his tax
collectors whom he had sent to collect the alms-levy:1 2.26.1 ʿAlī
commands his tax collector to be conscious of God in private affairs and
hidden acts, for there is no true witness, and no real agent, other than
God. ʿAlī commands his tax collector to make sure that while he shows
obedience to God in public, he should never do the opposite in private.
To discharge his trust and offer worship with sincerity, the tax
collector's private and public life should not contradict, and his
actions and words should not be in opposition. ʿAlī also commands him to
make sure he never abuses or reviles his subjects. He should never raise
himself above them because of his charge, for they are his brothers in
faith and his helpers in the collection of dues. 2.26.2 You have a
prescribed share, a recognized right, in this levy. You also have
partners---the poor, the weak, and the destitute. I will give you your
share in full, but you should leave them their full share, else you will
be among those who face an army of adversaries on the day of
resurrection. Woe to the man whose adversaries before God are the
mendicant, the poor, the beggar, the helpless, the debtor, and the
wayfarer!2 If you scorn your trust and forage in the pastures of
embezzlement, if you don't keep your soul and your faith clean from its
filth, you will secure shame for yourself in this world, and even
greater shame and humiliation in the hereafter. The most dreadful
embezzlement is embezzlement of property that belongs to the community.
The most terrible deception is deceiving the Imam. 2.27 From ʿAlī's
testament to Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, when he placed him in charge of
Egypt:3 1 In Kufa during his caliphate, 35--40/656--661, when he sent
Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym al-Azdī to collect the alms-levy (ṣadaqah). Nuʿmān,
Daʿāʾim, 1:252. 2 These are among the eight categories of recipients for
the alms-levy named in the Qurʾan, Tawbah 9:60. Discussion in B 811;
Ḥ15:161. The Arabic word madfūʿūn---translated here as "helpless" (after
R 3:61; Ḥ15:161, in the Qurʾanic category of "in the path of the God,"
fī sabīl Allāh)---could also be interpreted, pace Ḥ15:161, as "weakly
faithful," i.e., the category of those "whose hearts are reconciled"
(al-muʾallafati qulūbuhum) to Islam. 3 Presumably written in Kufa
between 36/656 and 38/658, in answer to questions Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr
posed to him in a letter. Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 1:235--248; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
264--281, Jurjānī, Iʿtibār 561--572 (Māmaṭīrī and Jurjānī include the
text of ʿAlī's full letter, and Muḥam- mad's letter of request). These
lines are similar to §2.46. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 560 Text and
Translation 2.27.1فٱخفض لهم جناحك وأَل ِ نْ لهم جانبك وٱبسط لهم وجهك وآسِ
بينهم في اللحظة والنظرة حتّى لا يطمع العظماء في حيفك لهم ولا ييأس الضعفاء
من عدلك عليهم. وإنّ الله يسائلـكم معشر عباده عن الصغيرة من أعمالـكم
والـكبيرة والظاهرة والمستورة فإن يعذّب فأنتم أظلم وإن ي َ عف١ فهو أكرم.
2.27.2وٱعلموا عباد الله أنّ المتّقين ذهبوا بعاجل الدنيا وآجل الآخرة
فشاركوا أهل الدنيا في دنياهم ولم يشاركهم أهل الدنيا في آخرتهم. سَكنوا
الدنيا بأفضل ما سُكنت وأكلوها بأفضل ما أُكلت فح َ ظوا من الدنيا بما حظي به
المترَفون وأخذوا منها ما أخذه الجبابرة المتكبّرون ثمّٱنقلبوا عنها بالزاد
المبلّغ والمتجر الرابح٢ أصابوا لذّة زهد الدنيا في بيصن مهل صقني الو ةوعد
مهل ّدَرُ ي ال مهترخآ يف اًدغ هللا ناريج مهّنأ اونّقيتو مهايند من لذّة.
2.27.3فٱحذروا عباد الله الموت وقربه وأعدّوا له عدّته فإنّه يأتي بأمر عظيم
وخطب جليل بخـير لا يكون معه شرّأبدًا أو شرّلا يكون معه خير أبدًا فمن أقرب
إلى الجنّة من عاملها ومن أقرب إلى النار من عاملها وأنّكم طُرداء الموت إن
أقمتم له أخذ كم وإن فررتم منه أدرككم وهو ألزم لـكم من ظِلـّكم الموت معقود
بنواصيكم والدنيا ت ُ طوى من خلفكم
فٱحذروانارًاقعرهابعيدوحرّهاشديدوعذابهاجديددارليسفيهارحمةولاتسمعفيها دعوة
ولا تفرّج فيها كربة. وإن ٱستطعتم أن يشتدّ خوفكم من الله وأن يحسن ظنّكم به
فٱجمعوا بينهما فإنّ العبد إنّما يكون حسن ظنّه بربّه على قدر خوفه من ربّه وإنّ
أحسن .هلل اً فوخ مهّدشأ هللاب اً ّنظ سانلا 2.27.4وٱعلم يا محمّد بن أبي بكر
أن ّ تنأف رصم لهأ يسفن يف يدانجأ مظعأ كتيّ لو دق ي محقوق أن تخالف على
نفسك وأن تنافح عن دينك ولو لم يكن لك إلّا ساعة من الدهر ١ن، ش، ي، ھ،
ونسخة في م: كذا. أصل م: ⟩يغفر⟨. ٢ن، ش، ھ، ونسخة في م: كذا. ي، .⟨حبرُ ملا⟩
:ھيفةخسنو،شيفةحّحصمو،ملصأو al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 561
2.27.1 Lower your wing over them, offer them your softer side, show them
your face, and give equal attention to all in glance and look, such that
the powerful are not emboldened to expect unfair favors and the weak do
not despair of getting justice. God will ask all his servants about
small and large deeds, those open and those concealed. If he punishes,
it is because you are the sinners. If he forgives, it is because he is
the benefactor. 2.27.2 Servants of God! Know that the pious partake of
the joys of this world and the next. They share the world with the
worldly, but the worldly do not share the hereafter with them. In this
world, they reside in the most splendid of residences and consume the
finest of delicacies. They possess the opulent comforts of the wealthy
and partake of the lavish luxuries of the mighty. Yet, when they depart,
they leave with a full supply of provisions and a large profit. They
enjoy the pleasures of this world without becoming immersed in worldli-
ness, content in the certain knowledge that they will be God's neighbors
in the next---no prayer rejected, no pleasure withheld. 2.27.3 Servants
of God! Beware of death, for it is imminent! Ready your provi- sions,
for death will bring a momentous affair, a fateful end---good with no
evil attached to it forever after, or evil with no good attached to it
forever after. Tell me: Who is closer to paradise than its seeker? Who
is closer to hellfire than its seeker? Death stalks you. If you remain
motionless, it will snatch you, if you flee, it will find you---it is
more firmly attached to you than your shadow. Death is bound to your
forelock while behind you the earth continues to be rolled up, like a
scroll. Beware of the Fire whose pit is bottomless, whose heat is
intense, and whose punishment is ever renewed! It is an abode where
there is no mercy, no prayer is heard, no pain is healed. If you can
fear God intensely and also place your hopes in him at the same time,
then do so, combine the two. Indeed, a servant's hope in his Lord is
only as strong as his fear of his Lord. Those who harbor the greatest
hopes of God's bounty are the ones who fear him most. 2.27.4 Muḥammad
ibn Abī Bakr! Know that I have placed you in charge of the
regionmostimportanttome---Egypt.Thisiswhatisduefromyou:opposeyour
passionsanddefendyourreligion,evenif youhaveonlyasinglehourleftinthis
world. Do not anger God in trying to please his creatures. God
compensates for al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 562 Text and
Translation ولات ُ سخِطاللهبرضاءأحدمنخلقهفإنّ
فياللهخلفًامنغيرهوليسمناللهخلففي غيره.صلّ
الصلاةلوقتهاالموقّتلهاولاتعجّلوقتهالفراغولاتؤخّرهاعنوقتهالٱشتغال وٱعلم أنّ
كلّ شيء من عملك تَبَعٌ لصلاتك. 2.27.5ومنه فإنّه لا سواء إمام الهدى وإمام
الردى ووليّ النبيّ وعدوّ النبيّ ولقد قال لي رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
⟩إن ّ هعنميف نمؤملا اّمأ اًكرشم الو اً نمؤم يتّمأ ىلع فاخأ ال ي الله بإيمانه
وأمّا المشرك فيقمعه الله بشر ملاع نانَ جلا قفانم ّلك مكيلع فاخأ يّنكـلو هك
اللسان يقول ما تعرفون ويفعل ما تنكرون⟨. 2.28ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى
معاوية جوابًا وهو من محاسن الـكتب 2.28.1أمّا بعد. فقد أتاني كتابك تذ كر
فيه ٱصطفاء الله محمّدًا صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله لدينه تْقِفَط ذإ اً بجع كنم
رهدلا انل َأَ بَخ دقلف .هباحصأ نم هدّيأ نمب هاّيإ هدييأتو َ تُخـبرنا ببلاء
اللهعندناونعمتهعلينافينبيّنافكنت َ فيذلك⟩كناقلالتمرإلىهَج َ
ر⟨أوداعيمسدِّدهإلى النِّضال.وزعمتأنّ أفضلالناسفيالإسلامفلانوفلانفذ
كرتأمرًاإنتمّٱعتزلك َ ملاو سئاسلاو لوضفملاو لضافلاو تنأ امو همْلَ ث ١كقحلي
مل صقن نإو هّلك سوس ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش: ⟩ينقصك⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 563
thelossof others,butnoonecancompensateforthelossof God.Praytheritual
prayer at its appointed time. Do not pray it early just because you have
time or delay it because you are occupied. Know that every single one of
your duties is subordinate to prayer. 2.27.5 From the same testament:
They are not equal---an Imam who leads to guidance and an Imam who leads
to perdition, a man who loves the Prophet and a man who hates the
Prophet. God's Messenger said to me: ⟨I do not fear harm for my
community from either believer or unbeliever. As for the believer, God
holds him back because of his belief. As for the unbeliever, God thwarts
him because of his unbelief. I fear harm for you from every man whose
heart harbors hypocrisy while his tongue spouts knowledge, who says what
you know to be good, but does what you know is evil.⟩1 2.28 From ʿAlī's
reply to Muʿāwiyah. This is one of the most eloquent letters of all
time:2 2.28.1 I received your letter in which you speak of how God
selected Muḥam- mad to propagate his religion and aided him through his
Companions. How astonishing the things time reveals about you! You
presume to inform us about the bounties God has bestowed upon us and of
the fact that he has blessed us with our Prophet---you are ⟨like the man
who carried dates to sell in Hajar⟩, themotherlodeof
dates,3orthemanwhochallengedhisinstructortoduelwith bow and arrow!You
allege that So-and-So and So-and-So are the most excellent Muslims.4 If
what you say is true, you have disqualified yourself from consid-
eration, whereas if what you say is false, the breach is none of your
concern. What have you to do with deciding who possesses more and who
less excel- lence, who is to lead and who is to be led! How dare
Freedmen and sons of 1 Hadith cited in Ṭabarānī, al-Muʿjam al-awsaṭ,
7:128; Muttaqī-Hindī, Kanz, 10:271. 2 In response to Muʿāwiyah's second
letter in 36/656 before the Battle of Ṣiffīn---which Muʿāwi-
yahsentwithAbūUmāmahal-Bāhilī---inwhichheagainaccusedʿAlīof envyof
thefirstthree caliphsandtreacherytowardsthem.Textof
Muʿāwiyah'sletterinḤ15:185--187.Baḥrānī(B819) says that §2.28 is part of
ʿAlī's reply to Muʿāwiyah, of which another part was transcribed ear-
lier as §2.9. 3 Ar. ka-nāqili tamrin ilā Hajar, lit. ⟨like one who
carries dates to Hajar⟩, is an ancient proverb, also rendered, ⟨like one
who carries dates to sell in Hajar⟩(ka-mustabḍiʿi tamrin ilā Hajar),
similar in meaning to the English idiom, ⟨carrying coal to Newcastle⟩.
Hajar is a town near Bahrain famous for its dates. I have added "the
motherlode of dates" in the translation for clarity. Proverb's
explanation in Ḥ15:188; B 819; F 372. 4 Abū Bakr and ʿUmar, the first
two Sunni Caliphs. Ḥ15:189. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 564 Text and
Translation وما للطلقاء وأبناء الطلقاء والتمييز بين المهاجرين الأوّلين
وترتيب درجاتهم وتعريف سْيـَ ل ٌحْدِق َ ّنَح⟩ دقلتاهيهمهتاقبط َ برَ
تالأ.اهلمكحلاهيلعنَماهيفمكحَيقِفَطو⟨اَ هْنِم َ ع
أيّهاالإنسانعلىظِلْعكوتعرفقصورذرعكوتتأخّرحيثأخّركالقَدَرفماعليكغلبة المغلوب ولا
لك ظفر الظافر وإنّك ل َ ذَهّاب في التيه رَوّاغ عن القصد. 2.28.2ألا ترى
غيرَمُخـبِرٍ لك لـٰكن بنعمة الله أُحدِّث أنّ قومًا ٱست ُ شهدوا في سبيل الله من
المهاجرين ولكلٍّ فضلٌ حتّى إذا ٱستشهد شهيدنا قيل سيّد الشهداء وخص ّ ه رسول
الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله بسبعين تكبيرة عند صلاته عليه. أَوَلا ترى أنّ
قومًا ق ُ طعت أيديهم في سبيل الله ولكلٍّ فضل حتّى إذا ف ُ عل بواحدنا ما ف ُ
عل بواحدهم قيل الطيّار في الجنّة وذو الجناحين. ولولا ما نهى الله عنه من
تزكية المرء نفسه ل َ ذ كر ذاكر ٌفضائل ُ مَ ت الو نينمؤملا بولق اهفرعت ةّمج
جّها آذان السامعين. فدَع عنك ⟩مَن ْ مَال َ ت ْ ب ِ ⟨ةَ ّيِمَ ّرلاِه al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 565
Freedmen presume to draw distinctions between the first Emigrants, by
classi- fying their stations and determining their ranks!1 Woe! ⟨An
arrow has whirred
thatdoesnotbelongtothequiver!⟩2Apersonhaspassedjudgmentonamatter
inwhichheshouldbetheonejudged,notthejudge!You,man!Willyounotpity your
limping hoof, recognize the shortness of your stride, and retreat to
where destiny has placed you? What have you to do with the defeat of the
defeated or the victory of the victorious! You are plunging deep into
the waterless desert and straying far from the right path! 2.28.2 Do you
not see---and I say this not to give you information but to speak of
God's blessings3---that many Emigrants were martyred in God's cause, and
each one had merit, but when our martyr was killed, he was named the
King of Martyrs, and God's Messenger singled him out by performing
seventy suppli- cations when he prayed over his body?4 Do you not see
that many warriors had their hands severed in God's cause, and each one
had merit, but when the same injury was inflicted on one of us, he was
named He-Who-Soars-in- Paradise and He-of-the-Two-Wings?5 And if God had
not forbidden men to praise themselves, I could mention someone else
whose abundant virtues are known to believers' hearts and not rejected
by the ears of them who listen!6 Leave off talking about ⟨one whose
arrows pursued an animal that veered to one side⟩!7 We are beholden only
to our Lord and all people are beholden to 1 On "Freedmen," see note at
§2.18. 2 Ancient Arabian proverb. B 820; Ḥ15:191; F 373; R 3:72. 3
Reference to Qurʾan, Ḍuḥā 93:11. 4 The passage is about the excellence
of the Prophet's and ʿAlī's clan of Hāshim. He compares their virtue and
their service in the cause of Islam to the ignobility and anti-Islamic
activities of Muʿāwiyah's Umayyad clan. The "King of Martyrs" (Sayyid
al-Shuhadāʾ) is the Prophet's and ʿAlī's uncle Ḥamzah ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib, who was killed fighting for him at the Battle of Uḥud.
Translated here as "supplications," the term takbīr, lit. "proclaiming
that \[God\] is the greatest (Allāhu akbar)," is invoked during a
funeral prayer, where it leads into a supplication for the deceased
(takbīr is also used in other contexts); the usual number of
supplications in a funeral prayer is five, and the seventy that the
Prophet prayed over Ḥamzah were unprece- dented and never repeated.
Ḥ15:193; B 820; F 373; R 3:73. 5 "He-Who-Soars-in-Paradise" (Ṭayyār),
also called "He-of-the-Two-Wings" (Dhū al-Janāḥayn) is ʿAlī's brother
and the Prophet's cousin, Jaʿfar ibn Abī Ṭālib, killed at the Battle of
Muʾtah. Ḥ 15:193; B 821; F 373; R 3:73. 6 The one with "abundant
virtues" is ʿAlī himself, who fought valiantly in the Muslims' early
battles. Ḥ15:193; B 820--821; R 3:74. 7 Ar. mālat bihi l-ramiyyah, lit.
⟨his arrows pursued an animal that veered to one side⟩, is a proverb
denoting one who pursues the elusive prey of worldly gain. Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ 15:194) says ʿAlī alludes here to ʿUthmān, who was from the
clan of Umayyah. Baḥrānī (B 821) says the reference is to ʿAmr ibn
al-Āṣ, and if so, the translation should be amended to "Leave off
talking with (instead of: about) one whose arrows pursues an animal that
veers to one side." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 566 Text and
Translation فإنّا صنائع ربّنا والناس بعد صنائع لنا لم يمنعنا قديم عزّنا
وعادي ّ طولنا على قومك أن خلطناكم بأنفسنا فنكحنا وأنكحنا فعل الأكفاء
ولستم هناك. وأن ّ ى يكون ذلك كذلك ومنّا النبيّ ومنكم المكذِّب ومنّا أسد الله
ومنكم أسد الأحلاف ومنّا سيّدا شباب أهل
الجنّةومنكمصِبْيةالنارومنّاخيرنساءالعالمينومنكمحمّالةالح َ
طبفيكثيرممّالناوعليكم. فإسلامنا قد سُمع وجاهليّتكم١ لا ت ُ وُ لوُأَو﴿ هلوق وهو
اّنع ّذش ام انل عمجي هللا باتكو عفد الْأَرْحَامِ ب َ عْضُهُمْ أَوْل َ باَ تِكيِف ٍضْعَبِ
بٰى َ لْوَأ َ ّن ِإ﴿ ىلاعتهلوقو﴾ِهَ ّللا ِ َنيِذَ ّلَ لَ ميِهاَرْب ِإِب ِساَ ّنلاى
َٰهَوُهوُعَبَ ّتا ُ نَمآ َنيذلاَو ُ ّيِبَ ّنلا اَذ ُ مْلا ُ ّيِلَوُ هَ ّللاَو او
ؤْمِنِين﴾فنحن مرّة أولى بالقرابة وتارة أولى
١م،ي،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش،ونسخةفيم: ⟩جاهليّتنا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 567 us. We intermingled with you despite our time-honored
might and our ancient superiority over your people. We married among you
and let you marry among us as though we were peers---we are not.1 How
could we be equal when we have the Prophet and you have the Nay-Sayer,2
when we have the Lion-of- God and you have the Lion-of-the-Alliances,3
when we have the Chiefs-of- the-Youth-of-Paradise and you have the
Boys-of-Hellfire,4 when we have the Most-Virtuous-Woman-of-all-People
and you have the Woman-Who-Carries- Firewood-to-Hell?5 And there are
many more things that speak for us and against you. Our noble deeds in
Islam have been heard by all, and your Age- of-Ignorance misdeeds cannot
be denied.6 God's Book brings together for us what was taken from us, in
his words, «Those who are from the same womb have more claim upon each
other according to God's Book,»7 with his words, «Those who have the
most claim on Abraham are the ones who followed him, and this Prophet,
and those who profess belief. God is the believers' master.»8 1
Marriages between the Hāshim and Umayyah clans discussed in
Ḥ15:195--196. 2 "The Prophet"(Nabī)isMuḥammad. "TheNay-Sayer"
(Mukadhdhib) is the UmayyadAbū Jahl ibn Hishām, at the head of nine
other men who fought Muḥammad at Badr (Qurʾan, Muz- zammil 73:11; B 821;
R 3:75; ʿA 681), or, less likely, Muʿāwiyah's father, Abū Sufyān ibn
Ḥarb (Ḥ 15:196). 3 "The-Lion-of-God" (Asad Allāh) is Ḥamzah ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib (B 821; Ḥ15:196; R 3:76; F 374, ʿA 681) and/or ʿAlī himself
(again, F 374). "The Lion-of-the-Alliances" (Asad al-Aḥlāf ) is one of
several possible Umayyads, either from the pre-Islamic period (more
likely)---ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah (Ḥ15:196; F 374), or some other men who had
the name "Asad," viz., Asad ibn ʿAbd al- ʿUzzā (B 821; R 3:76), Asad ibn
Khuzaymah ibn Mudrikah ibn Ilyās (again, F 374), or Asad ibn Rabīʿah ibn
Nizār (again, F 374)---or from the early Islamic period, viz., Abū
Sufyān (ʿA681)."TheAlliances"referstotheso-called"Allianceof
thePureOnes"(Ḥilf al-Muṭayyabīn)
betweencertainQurayshclansinthepre-Islamicperiod,regardingtheallocationof
theritual offices of the Kaʿbah (R 3:86; B 821); if the "Lion" is Abū
Sufyān, it refers to the tribal alliance put together by the Quraysh
against Muḥammad. 4 "The Chiefs-of-the-Youth-of-Paradise" (Sayyidā
Shabāb Ahl al-Jannah) are Ḥasan and Ḥusayn, ʿAlī's sons with Fāṭimah,
the Prophet's grandsons (R 3:77; F 77; Ḥ15:197; B 822; ʿA 681). "The
Boys-of-Hellfire" (Ṣibyat al-Nār) are the sons of the Umayyad ʿUqbah ibn
Abī Muʿīṭ, who was killed fighting against the Muslims at the Battle of
Badr (Ḥ15:197; F 374; B 822), or the sons of Muʿāwiyah's second cousin
Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam (R 3:77; again B 822; ʿA 681). 5 "The
Most-Virtuous-Woman-of-all-People" (Khayr Nisāʾ al-ʿĀlamīn) is Fāṭimah
al-Zahrāʾ, the Prophet's daughter and ʿAlī's wife (R 3:77; Ḥ15:197; B
822; ʿA 681). "The Woman-Who-Carries- Firewood-to-Hell" (Ḥammālat
al-Ḥaṭab; "to-Hell" is added in the translation from the Qurʾan- ic
context) is Umm Jamīl bint Ḥarb, Muʿāwiyah's paternal aunt and wife of
Abū Lahab (Ref- erence to Qurʾan, Masad 111:4; Ḥ15:197; B 822; R 3:77; F
374; ʿA 681). 6 In some manuscripts, the pronoun is "our" (-nā), which
would read, "and our noble deeds in the Age of Ignorance (
jāhiliyyatunā) cannot be denied." On the virtues of the Hāshim clan, see
Ḥ15:198--269. Refutation of virtues attributed to the Umayyads in
Ḥ15:270--295. 7 Qurʾan, Aḥzāb 33:6. 8 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:68. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 568 Text and
Translation ّ لص هللا لوسرب ةفيقسلا موي راصنألا ىلع نورجاهملا ّجتحٱ اّ
ملو .ةعاطلاب ى الله عليه َ لَ ف هلآو جوا عليهم فإن يكن الفُلْج به فالحقّ لنا
دونكم وإن يكن بغيره فالأنصار على دعواهم. 2.28.3وزعمت َ أن ّ ي لكلّ
الخلفاء حسدت ُ وعلى كلّهم ب َ غَيت فإن يكن ذلك كذلك ّ نإ تلقو .⟨اَهُراَ ع
َكْنَعٌ رِهاَظ ٌةاَكَش َكْلِ تَو⟩ كيلإ رذعلا نوكيف كيلع ةيانِجلا سيلف ي كنت أُقاد
كما ي ُ تحدمف ّمذت نأ تدرأ دقل هللاُ رْمَعَ لو عيابأ ىّتح شوشخملا لمجلا داق
وأنتفضحفٱفت َ ا ً ّكاشنكيملاماًمولظمنوكينأيفةضاضَغنمملسملاىلعاموتحض في
دينه ولا مُرتابًا بيقينه. وهذه حجّتي إلى غيرك قصدها ولـكنّي أطلقت لك منها
بقدر ما سَن َ ح من ذ كرها. 2.28.4ثمّ ذ كرت َ ما كان من أمري وأمر عثمان فلك
أن تجاب عن هذه لرحمك مأ هّفكتسٱو هدعقتسٱف هترصن هل لذب نَمأ هلتاقم ىلإ
ىدهأو هل ىدعأ ناك انُ ّيَأف .هنم من ٱستنصره فتراخى عنه وبث َ ق ىتأ ىّتح
هيلإ نونَ ملا ّ دَره عليهكل ّ ُ هَ ّللا﴿ ملع دقل هللاو ا الْم ُ ِ هِناَوْخ ِإِل
َنيِ لِ ئاَقْلاَو ْمُكنِم َنيِقِّوَع مْ هَل ُ س ْأَ بْلا َنوُ ت ْأَي اَلَو اَ نْيَ ل ِإ َ ّم ً
ليِ لَ ق ا َ ّل ِإ َ ا﴾. وما كنت ُ لأعتذرمنأن ّ
يكنتأَنْقِمعليهأحداثًافإنكانالذنبإليهإرشاديوهدايتيلهفر ُ ب َ ّ al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 569
We possess the higher claim---because of our kinship, yes, but also
because of our obedience to God. When the Emigrants argued against the
Allies on the Day of the Portico,1 the Emigrants challenged the Allies'
claim on the basis of their own kinship with God's Messenger. If the
argument is based on kinship with the Messenger, then we, not they,
possess the truer claim. If it is based on something else, then the
Allies' claim stands. 2.28.3 You allege that I was envious of every
caliph and disloyal to all. If that is true, then the crime was not
committed against you, and you are due no justifi- cation. As the saying
goes, ⟨that is a disease whose shame is external to you.⟩2 You also say
that I had to be dragged to give the pledge of allegiance, like a camel
pulled by a wooden bit in its nose. God's life, you intended to revile
but haveofferedpraiseinstead,youintendedtodisgracebutareyourself
disgraced! A Muslim is never shamed because he is a victim of
oppression, as long as he does not doubt in his faith or falter in his
certainty. The argument I have made here is intended for another, but I
have set it before you to the extent that I thought necessary. 2.28.4
You recount what happened between me and ʿUthmān---you are due a
response in this matter because of your kinship with him. So tell me,
which of us was more wrong in our actions toward him and did more to
bring about his assassination? Was it the one who offered him support,
but who he insisted should stand back and desist? Or was it the one with
whom he pleaded for help, who loosened the reins of his mount to slow it
down and stalled in giving aresponse, who
pusheddeathtowardhimuntilhisfateoverpoweredhim?3No, indeed! God knows
the identity of «those among you who impede, who say to their brothers,
"Come help us," while they themselves seldom enter the fray.»4 I will
not apologize for the fact that I chastised him for some of his actions.
If my crime against him is my counsel and guidance, then how often are
the 1 "The Day of the Portico" (Yawm al-Saqīfah) refers to the assembly,
immediately after Muḥam- mad's death, when some of the Emigrants and
Allies gathered in the covered assembly area of the Banū Sāʿidah clan,
and which ended with the pledge for Abū Bakr. See ʿAlī's similar initial
response (and references for further details) in §1.64 and my note
there. 2 Second hemistich of a verse by the pre-Islamic poet Abū Dhuʾayb
al-Hudhalī (Dīwān al- Hudhaliyyīn, 1:21), used as a proverb. The first
half is (اَ ه ُ ّبِحُأ يِّ نَأ َنوُشاَولا اَهَرَ ّيَ عَو ⟨ :)Accusers shamed her,
saying I was in love with her.⟩F 373; R 3:79; B 822. 3 "The one who
offered him support" is ʿAlī. "The one with whom he pleaded for help" is
Muʿāwiyah. Details in B 823. 4 Qurʾan, Aḥzāb 33:18. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 570 Text
and Translation َ قَو⟩ هلبنذال ٍموُ لَم دْ ي َ سْت َ َ نَ تُ مْلاَةَ ّنِّظلاُدْيِف ص
ِّحٗ⟨.وماأردت َ لْص ِإْلاا َ ّل ِإ﴿ ُ احَ مَااسْت َ طَعْت ُ َوَ تِهْيَ لَ عِهَ ّللاِب ا َ
ّل ِإ يِقيِفْوَ ت اَمَو تْل َ ّك ُ ﴾. 2.28.5وذ كرت َ أنّه ليس لي ولأصحابي عندك
إلّا السيف فلقد أضحكت بعد ٱستعبار متى أُلْفِي َ ت ثِّبَ ل⟩ـف نيفَ ّوخم فويسلابو
نيلكان ءادعألا نع بلّطملا دبع ونب ْ ً لْيِ لَ ق ْ ١ِقَحْلَ ي ا َ مَح اَجْيَ هْلا ل⟨.
فسيطلبك من تطلب ويقرب منك ما تستبعد وأنا مُرقِل نحوك في جَحْفَل نيلبرستم
مهماتَ ق عطاس مهماحِز ديدش ناسحإب نيعباتلاو راصنألاو نيرجاهملا نم سرابيل
الموت أحب ّ اللقاء إليهم لقاء ربّهم قد صحبتهم ذرّيّة ب َ دريّة وسيوف هاشميّة
قد عرفت َ مواقع ن ِ .﴾ٍديِعَبِ بَنيِمِ لا َ ّظلا َنِمَيِه اَمَو﴿ كلهأو كّدجو كلاخو
كيخأ يف اهلاص 2.29ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أهل البصرة
وقدكانمنٱنتشارحبلـكموشقاقكممالمت َ غْب َ وْاعنهفعفوت ُ عنمجرمكمورفعتالسيف
عن مدبر كم وقبلت من مقبلـكم. فإن خَطَت ىلإ ةرئاجلا ءارآلا هَفَسو ةيدرُ ملا
رومألا مكب ْ ١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩يدرك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 571 innocent blamed! ⟨Sometimes, the only benefit a
well-wisher derives is suspi- cion!⟩1 I intend «only to set things right
as much as I can. My direction comes from God. In him I place my
trust.»2 2.28.5 You also say that you have nothing to offer me and my
supporters but the sword. My eyes were moist earlier and now you make me
laugh!When have you ever found the sons of ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib to shrink
from enemies or fear the sword? ⟨Wait just a little---Ḥamal will soon
join the fray!⟩3 The one you seek shall soon seek you, and what you
think is far will come close indeed! I shall ride to you swiftly,
bringing a large army of Emigrants, Allies, and Followers- in-Virtue,
pressing strongly, raising dust, clothed in robes of death, and longing
to meet their Lord. They number children of the warriors of Badr,
wielding the swords of Hāshim---you have experienced their strikes on
your brother, your uncle, your grandfather, and your kinsmen!4 The blade
«is never far from the wicked.»5 2.29 From ʿAlī's letter to the people
of Basra:6 You know this well: You severed your rope of allegiance
earlier and seceded from the community, but I pardoned those among you
who had committed crimes, lifted the sword from those who had turned
their backs, and accepted those who returned to me. If damning events
and the immaturity of your 1 Second hemistich of a verse by an anonymous
poet used as a proverb. The first half is (وَكَمْ سُقْت ُ فِي آثَارِهِمْ مِن ْ ن َ
صِيحَةٍ ⟨ :)How many camels of counsel did I drive toward them!⟩F 375; B
824. 2 Qurʾan, Hūd 11:88. 3 Firsthalf of
aversebythepre-IslamicwarriorḤamalibnBadr(or:ḤamalibnSaʿdal-ʿAshīrah),
in response to threats by Mālik ibn Zuhayr, used as a proverb. The
second half is (مَا أَحْسَنَ تْوَ ملا تْوَ ملا اَذ ِإ ُ لَزَ ن ُ ⟨ :)O how beautiful
is death when death alights!⟩F 374; R 3:82; B 824. 4 The Umayyad men
slain by the Muslims in the Battle of Badr included Muʿāwiyah's brother
Ḥanẓalah ibn Abī Sufyān, his maternal uncle Walīd ibn ʿUtbah, and his
grandfather ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah. R 3:83; B 824. 5 Qurʾan, Hūd 11:83. 6
Excerpt from a letter to the Basrans in 38/658, during the Ibn
al-Ḥaḍramī episode: After Muʿāwiyah took Egypt, he sent ʿAbdallāh ibn
ʿĀmir ibn al-Ḥaḍramī to Basra to recruit its peo- ple, and many welcomed
him. ʿAlī's governor, Ziyād ibn Abīhi, wrote for help, and ʿAlī sent the
Basran Jāriyah ibn Qudāmah al-Saʿdī with fifty men from Kufa, and with
this letter addressed to the Basrans. Jāriyah confronted Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī
and killed him and his men. Details of Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī's attack in
Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 2:383--412 (with full text of the letter at
2:403--404); Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:110--112. See also oration §1.1.90
(Qāṣiʿah), which is said to have been deliv- ered at this time.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 572 Text and
Translation مُنابذتي وخلافي فها أنا ذا قد قرّبت جيادي ورحلت ركابي ولئن
ألجأتموني إلى المسير َ لَك اّلإ اهيلإ لمجلا موي نوكي ال ةعقو مكب َ ّنَعِقْوُأل
مكيلإ عقَة لاعق. مع أن ّ ي عارف لذي َ ه َ ّتُم زواجتم ريغ هّقح ةحيصنلا يذلو
هلضف مكنم ةعاطلا .ّيفو ىلإ اً ثكان الو ءيرب ىلإ اًم 2.30ومن كتاب له عليه
السلام إلى معاوية ّنإف هتلاهجب رَذعُ ت ال ام ةفرعم ىلإ عجرٱو كيلع هّقح يف
رظنٱو كيدل اميف هللا قّتٱف للطاعة أعلامًا واضحة وسبل ً ا نيّرة ومَح َ
اهفلاخيو سايكألا ١اهدِرَ ي ةبَ لّطُم ةياغو ةجْهَن ةّج الأنكاس من ن َ كَب عنها
جارَعن الحقّ وخَب َ .هتمقن هب ّلحأو هتمعن هللا رّيَ غو هيتلا يف ط
فنفسَكنفسَكفقدبي ّ ناللهلكسبيلكوحيثتناهتبكأموركفقدأجريتإلىغاية خسرومحل ّ
ترعوأوكلاهملاكتدروأواً ّيَغكتمحقأوا ً ّرشكتَ جَلوأدقكسفن ّنإورفكة عليك
المسالك. 2.31ومن وصيّة للحسن بن عليّعليهما السلام كتبها إليه بحاضرين عند
ٱنصرافه من صفّين 2.31.1من الوالد الفان٢ المقرّللزمان المدبر العمر المستسلم
للدهر الذامّ للدنيا الساكن مساكن الموتى الظاعن عنها غدًا إلى المولود٣
المؤمِّل ما لا يدرك السالك سبيل من قد هلك غرض الأسقام ورهينة الأيّام ورميّة
المصائب وعبد الدنيا وتاجر الغرور وغريم المنايا وأسير الموت وحليف الهموم
وقرين الأحزان ون َ ص ْ ب الآفات وصريع الشهوات وخليفة الأموات.
١ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم،ونسخةفيش: ⟩يؤدّيها⟨. ٢م،ن،ھ،ونسخةفي
ش:كذا.ي،وأصلش: ⟩الفاني⟨. ٣م،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.أصلش: ⟩الولد⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 573
despotic views now incite you to break your pledge again and challenge
me, then beware! I have kept my steeds close, and my mounts saddled! If
you force me to march, I shall charge against you in a battle that will
make the thrash- ing you received at the Battle of the Camel seem like a
romp in the meadow. I am also aware of the virtue of those of you who
are obedient and the rights of those who are sincere. In punishing the
guilty I shall not violate the innocent, in punishing those who break
the pledge I shall not violate the faithful. 2.30 From ʿAlī's letter to
Muʿāwiyah:1 Fear God in all that you do and reflect on what you owe him.
Return to the path of obedience, for your ignorance of it will not be
excused. Its waymarks are clear, its roads are bright, its thoroughfare
is open, and its destination is the one you should seek. The intelligent
traverse it to reach water, while the
wretchedturnaway.Whoeverdeviatesfromitstraysfromthetruthandislostin the
waterless desert---God overturns his blessings and afflicts him with
harsh punishment. Look out for your soul, Muʿāwiyah, look out for your
soul! God has shown you the grim reality of your current path and where
your affairs will end. You speed inexorably toward the destination of
utter loss and the resting-place of unbelief. Your passions have led you
into evil, cast you into error, brought you to uncharted wastes, and
made the road ahead of you steep and arduous. 2.31 From a testament of
counsel that ʿAlī wrote to his son Ḥasan, at Ḥāḍirīn, on the return from
Ṣiffīn:2 2.31.1 From a father who admits the power of time, bows to the
supremacy of fate, censures this world below, lives in the abodes of the
dead, and will depart from them tomorrow, to a son who hopes for what he
cannot attain and walks the path of men long gone, a target for disease,
a mortgage pledged to the pas- sage of days, a quarry stalked by
adversity, a slave of the world, a merchant trading in deception, a
debtor bound to doom, a prisoner of death, a friend of sorrow, a
companion of grief, a victim of calamity, a man felled by passion, and
an heir to the dead. 1 Excerpt from a letter---presumably from Kufa,
and, since there is no reference to a prior bat- tle, before the Battle
of Ṣiffīn in 37/657---in reply to a letter by Muʿāwiyah containing
threats and accusations. Earlier part of ʿAlī's letter recorded in B
825; Ḥ16:7--8. 2 In 37/657; in northern Syria. Ḥāḍirīn could be the name
of a place, or the word could be ḥāḍirayn, sing. ḥāḍir, meaning "two
urban spaces" (Ḥ16:52). Addressed to Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah (rather
than Ḥasan) in Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 201. One of the most famous and widely
narrated of ʿAlī's testaments. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 574 Text and
Translation 2.31.2أمّا بعد. فإنّ فيما تبيّنت ُ من إدبار الدنيا عنّي وجُموح
الدهر عليّ وإقبال الآخرة ذ نع ينُعَزَ ي ام ّيلإ كر مَن سواي والاهتمام بما
ورائي غير أن ّ ي حيث تفرّد بي دون هموم الناس همّ نفسي فصدفني رأيي وصرفني
عن هواي وصرّح لي محض أمري فأفضى بي إلى جِدّ لا يكون فيه لعب وصدق لا
يشوبهكذب. وجدت ُ ك بعضي بل وجدتك كل ّ ي ينينعي ام كرمأ نم ينانَعف يناتأ
كاتأ ول توملا ّنأكو ينباصأ كباصأ ول اً ئيش ّنأك ىّتح .تينف وأ كل تيقب انأ
نإ هب اً رهظتسم اذه يباتك كيلإ تبتكف يسفن رمأ نم 2.31.3فإن ّ َ نُ ب يأ
هللا ىوقتب كيصوأ ي يّ ولزوم أمره وعمارة قلبك بذ كره والاعتصام بحبلهوأي
ةظعوملابكبلق ِيحَأ.هبتذخأتنأنإهللانيبوكنيبببسنمقثوأببس ُ ّ وأَمِتْه بالزهادة
وق َ ذب هلـّ لذو ١ةمكحلاب هرّونو نيقيلاب هِّو كر الموت وقرّره بالفناء وبصّره
فجائع الدنيا وحذّره صولة الدهر وفحش تقلّب الليالي والأيّام وأعرض عليه أخبار
الماضين وذ كّره بما أصاب من كان قبلك من الأوّلين وس ِ ر في ديارهم وآثارهم
فٱنظر ما فعلوا وعمّا ٱنتقلوا وأين حلّوا ونزلوا فإنّك تجدهم ٱنتقلوا عن
الأحبّة وحلّوا دار الغربة. وكأنّك عن قليل قد صرت كأحدهم فأصلح مثواك ولا تَب
ِ ـع آخرتك بدنياك ودَع القول فيما لا تعرف والخطاب فيما لا تكلّف وأمسك عن
طريق إذا خفت ضلالته فإنّ الـكف ّ عند حيرة الضلال خير من ركوب الأهوال وَأْمُرْ
بالمعروف تكن من أهله وأَنكِر المنكر بيدك ولسانك وباي ِ نْ مَن فعله بج ُ هدك
وجاهد في الله حقّ جهاده ولا تأخذك في الله لومة لائم وخُض الغمرات للحقّ حيث
كان وت َ يف ه َ ّقَف الدين وعوّد نفسك الصبر على المكروه ونعم الخلق التصبّر
وأَلْجِئ نفسك في الأمور كلّها ١ن،ي،ھ:كذا.ش: ⟩ونجّدهبالحكمة⟨.م:سقطت
⟩ونوّرهبالحكمة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 575
2.31.2 Ihaveobservedhowtheworldhasturneditsbackonme,howrefractory fate
has bolted with my affairs, and how the hereafter steadily
approaches.This has restrained me from thinking about anyone else or
from worrying about any circumstances I might leave behind---cares about
myself have driven out cares about other people. My prudence has led me
to rebuff and reject my passions, and my reality has become clear,
impelling me to gravity untainted by frolic and truth untarnished by
lies. Yet, I realize that you are part of me, nay, you are all of me. If
something hurts you, it hurts me. If death comes to you, it comes to me.
Your affairs are as important to me as my own, and for this reason, I
write this testament for you. It will support you while I remain with
you and after I am gone. 2.31.3 My dear son, I counsel you to be
conscious of God. Obey his command,
nourishyourheartwithhisremembrance,andholdfasttohisrope---if grasped
tightly, can you imagine a stronger bond between you and God?1 Revive
your heart with pious counsel, kill its appetites through renunciation,
strengthen it through certainty, and illuminate it with wisdom. Humble
it by the remem- brance of death, impress upon it the reality of
annihilation, and make it aware of the world's sudden assaults. Give it
warning of the violent attacks of fate and the horrible changes wrought
by the passage of nights and days. Place before it reports of past
peoples and remind it of the calamities that befell the ancients. Walk
among their dwellings, their ruins, and reflect: What happened to them?
What did they leave behind? Where did they take up residence? You will
find that they left their loved ones and took residence in a strange
land. Before long, you too will join them, so strive to build your
permanent home and do not sell
outthehereafterinexchangeforthisworld.Leaveoff talkingaboutwhatyoudo not
know, or calling out people about things you are not charged with
address- ing; desist from any path that might lead you astray, for
holding back when you fear error is far better than sailing the dread
swells of the unknown; command good, and you will belong to its people;
forbid evil with hand and tongue and strive hard to distance yourself
from those who practice it; fight wickedness in the name of God, as is
his due; do not be disheartened by any who might revile or shame you for
anything you do for God; dive into the depths in the quest for truth,
wherever or whenever you may have to do so; gain a good understand- ing
of religion; and habituate yourself to patience---what a beautiful trait
is patience! In all your affairs, seek support from God, for in him you
seek the 1 "Hold fast to his rope," reference to Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān
3:103. The Shiʿi commentator Rāwandī (R 3:93--94) narrates a hadith in
which the Prophet named ʿAlī as the embodiment of God's rope. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 576 Text and
Translation هديب ّنإف كّبرل ةلأسملا يف صلخأو زيزع عنامو زيرح فهك ىلإ
اهئِجلُ ت كّنإف كهٰلإ ىلإ العطاء والحرمان وأكثِر الاستخارة. وتفهّم وصيّتي ولا
تذهبنّ صفحًا فإنّ خير القول ما ١.همّ لعت ّقحي ال ملعب عفتني الو عفني ال ملع
يف ريخ ال هّنأ ملعٱو عفن 2.31.4أي بنيّ إن ّ تغلب دق ٢ينُ تيأر اّ مل ي ترداب
اً نهو دادزأ ينُ تيأرو اً ّنس ُ ُ بوصيّتي إليك خصالًامنهاأني َ
عجل٣بيأجليدونأنأُفضيإليكبمافينفسيوأنأُنقَصفيرأييكما نقصت في جسمي أو يسبقني
إليك بعض غلبات الهوى وفتن الدنيا فتكون كالص بع َ ّ َ حلابلقامّنإو.روفَ
ّنلا دَثكالأرضالخاليةماألقيفيهامنشيءقبلتهفبادرتكبالأدب قبل أن ي َ لهأ
كافك دق ام رومألا نم ٤كيأر ّدِجب لبقتستل كّبُ ل لغتشيو كبلق وُسق التجارب ب ِ
تيفُك دق نوكتف هتبرجتو هتَ يْغ ةبرجتلا جالع نم تيفوعو ةبِ ل َ ّطلا ةنوؤم َ
.هنم انيلع ملظأ امّبر ام كل نابتسٱو هيتأن اّ نك دق ام كلذ نم كاتأف
2.31.5أَي َ نُ ب ْ ّ نإ َ ّي ي وإن لم أكن عمّرت عمر من كان قبلي فقد نظرت في
أعمالهم وفكّرتفيأخبارهموسرتفيآثارهمحتّىعدتكأحدهمبلكأن ّ يبماٱنتهىإليّمن
أمورهمقدعُمّرتمعأوّلهمإلىآخرهمفعرفتصفوذلكمنكدرهونفعهمنضرره فٱستخلصتلكمنكلّ
أمرنَخيلته٥وتوخّيتلكجميلهوصرفتعنكمجهوله.ورأيتُ حيث عَناني من أمرك ما يعني
الوالد الشفيق وأجمعت عليه من أدبك أن يكون ذلك وأنت مقبل العمر ومقتبل
الدهر ذو نيّة سليمة ونفس صافية وأن أبتدئك بتعليم كتاب الله عزّ وجلّ وتأويله
وشرائع الإسلام وأحكامه وحلاله وحرامه لا أجاوز ذلك بك .⟨همّ لعت ... صلخأو⟩
تطقس :م لصأ .اذك :م يف تفيضأو ،ھ ،ي ،ش ،ن١ ٢م، ش، ي، ھ: كذا. ن، ونسخة في
ش: ⟩رأيتك⟨. ٣م، ش، ھ: كذا. ن، ي، وزيادة في ش، مع إضافة بعض الألفاظ:
⟩بوصيّتي إليك أوردت خصالًا منها قبل أن يعجل⟨. ٤م، ش: كذا. ن، ي: ⟩بحدّ
رأيك⟨.ھ:معًا،وفيهانسخةمععلامةالصحّة: ⟩بحداثتك⟨. ٥م،ي،ونسخةفيش،ھ:
كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ،ونسخةفيي: ⟩جليله⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 577
shelter of a deep cave and a mighty protector. Petition your Lord with a
sin- cere heart, for his hand holds the power to give or refuse, ask him
to help you choose what is good. Understand my testament and do not turn
your face away, for the best words are those that bring benefit. Know
this: There is no good in knowledge that brings no benefit, there is
also no benefit in acquiring classes of knowledge that are not
recommended for you to learn.1 2.31.4 My dear son! When I saw that I had
lived to a full age, when I saw that I was growing weak, I hastened to
prepare this testament for you and listed vir- tuous traits of
character. I worried lest death overtake me before I could reveal to you
what was in my heart, before weakness affected my mind as it has my
body, and before forces of passion or the seductive powers of the world
rushed to make you intractable and skittish. A young heart is like
untilled land---it accepts whatever is sown. I have sought to refine
your disposition before your heart hardens and before your mind becomes
preoccupied. I hope that serious commitment will help you learn through
the experiences of the experienced and save you from confrontation and
investigation, and that it will spare you the hardship of pursuit and
the bitter medicine of suffering. I hope that you learn from my
experience, yet I further hope that even those things that may have
remained obscure to me become clear to you. 2.31.5 My dear son! Although
I have not lived as long as those before me, I have reflected upon their
acts, pondered their histories, and walked among their ruins, until I am
almost one of them. In fact, because of what I have learned of their
affairs, I feel as though I have lived with the first of them all the
way to the last of them. I have distinguished the pure from the impure
and the beneficial from the harmful. From each of their affairs, I have
extracted the essential points of benefit, sought out the most
beautiful, and dispensed with those that are unproven. My concern for
you is as a loving father, and my hope is to complete the refinement of
your character. The time for this is now, while you are still young,
with your life ahead of you, while your intentions are inno- cent and
your soul pure. I wish to begin by teaching you the Book of God and its
deep meanings, the laws of Islam and its commands, what it has made
licit and what illicit. I want you to focus on these things and leave
the rest aside. 1 The "classes of knowledge that are not recommended for
you to learn" are interpreted as (1) any kind of knowledge that it is
not required or recommended to learn (R 3:94); or (2) that constitutes
arts prohibited in Islam, such as magic, soothsaying, and astrology (B
831); or (2) that does not bring benefit for the hereafter (F 375);
specifically, (4) geometry, mathematics, or their like (!) (Ḥ16:66).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 578 Text and
Translation إلى غيره. ثمّأشفقت أن يلتبس عليك ما ٱختلف الناس فيه من
أهوائهم وآرائهم مثل الذيٱلتبسعليهمفكانإحكامذلكعلىماكرهتمنتنبيهكأحب ّ
إليّمنإسلامك إلى أمر لا آمن عليك فيه الهلـكة ورجوت أن يوفّقك الله فيه
لرشدك وأن يهديك لقصدك فعهدت إليك وصيّتي هذه. 2.31.6وٱعلميابنيّأنّ أحب ّ
ماأنتآخذبهإليّمنوصيّتيتقوىاللهوالاقتصارعلىما ٱفترضه الله عليك والأخذ بما
مضى عليه الأوّلون من آبائك والصالحون من أهل بيتك. فإنّهم لم يدعوا أن نظروا
لأنفسهم كما أنت ناظر وفكّروا كما أنت مفكّر ثمّردّهم آخر ذلك
إلىالأخذبماعرفواوالإمساكعمّالميكلّفوا.فإنأبتنفسكأنتقبلذلكدونأنتعلم
كماعلموافليكنطلبكذلكبتفهّموتعلّملابتورّطالشبهاتوعلوّالخصومات.وٱبدأقبل نظرك
في ذلك بالاستعانة بإلٰهك عليه والرغبة إليه في توفيقك وترك كلّ شائبة أولجتك
في شبهة أو أسلمتك إلى ضلالة فإذا أيقنت أن قد صفا قلبك فخشع وتمّرأيك
وٱجتمع بحت ام كل عمتجي مل تنأ نإو كل ترّسف اميف رظنٱف اًدحاو اً ّمه كلذ يف
كّمه ناكو ّ من نفسك وفراغ نظرك وفكرك فٱعلم أنّك إنّما تخبط العشواء وتتورّط
الظلماء وليس طالب الدين من خبط ولا من خلّط والإمساك عن ذلك أمثل.
2.31.7فتفهّم يا بنيّ وصيّتي وٱعلم أنّ مالك الموت هو مالك الحياة وأنّ الخالق
هو المميت وأنّ المفني هو المعيد وأنّ المبتلي هو المعافي وأنّ الدنيا لم تكن
لتستقرّإلّا على ما جعلها الله عليه من النعماء والابتلاء والجزاء في المعاد
أو ما شاء ممّا لا نعلم. فإن أشكل عليك شيء من ذلك فٱحمله على جهالتك به
فإنّك أوّل ما خُلقت َ ١ جاهل ً ا ثمّ علمت وما أكثر ما تجهل من الأمر ويتحيّر
فيه رأيك ويضلّ فيه بصرك ثمّتبصره بعد ذلك. فٱعتصم بالذي خلقك ورزقك وسوّاك
وليكن له تعبّدك وإليه رغبتك ومنه شفقتك. ١م،ي،ھ:كذا.ن،ش:تكرّرت ⟩خلقت⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 579
I worry lest you should become confused, as others have, about issues on
which people's interpretations and views differ. Although I am loath to
alarm you, I prefer to strengthen you in advance, rather than leave you
without caution about approaching times in which you could perish. I ask
God to direct you to the right path and guide you toward your goal.
Accordingly, I bequeath to you this testament. 2.31.6 My dear son! Know
that the directives of my testament most dear to me, the ones to which I
sincerely hope you will adhere, are the following: Remain conscious of
God and do not overstep the boundaries of God's mandates for you. Adhere
to the path followed by your forebears and your pious family. Like you,
they never stopped caring for their souls or reflecting deeply on
matters, so they carried out all that was good and refrained from all
they had not been charged to undertake. If your heart refuses to accept
their path without first learning what they learned, then commence your
search with understanding and acumen, without hurtling down the
precipice of doubt, or engaging in stri- dent argumentation. Begin your
exploration, moreover, by seeking aid from God and petitioning him for
direction. Beware of lapses that could throw you into doubt or give you
over to error. Once you have ensured that your heart has become pure and
humble, your mind mature and composed, your aspiration
resolute,beginreflectingonwhatIhaveexplained.If youcannotachievethis,if
you cannot compose your heart or clear your perception and thoughts,
then--- and this you should know too---you will stumble around heavily
like a blind camel and be flung headlong down a dark precipice; and one
who stumbles around heavily, one who is delirious, is no seeker of
religion. In such a case, it is better to refrain altogether. 2.31.7 My
dear son! Try to understand my testament. Know that the master of death
is also the master of life, the creator is also the destroyer, the
demol- isher is also the restorer, the one who inflicts pain is also the
one who bestows wellbeing. The world can be sustained only in the way of
God's plan---with blessings and affliction, and repayment in the return
to him, or other things that he wills that remain unknown to us. If any
of this is difficult for you to grasp, attribute it to your ignorance.
At the time of your creation, you were created ignorant, then you
learned. How often it happens that you are igno- rant of something, that
your mind is perplexed about it and your perception leads you astray,
but then afterward you perceive it clearly! Seek refuge in the one who
created you, who sustained you, who molded you in harmonious form. Let
your worship be for him, let your hope be in him, let your fear be of
him. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 580 Text and
Translation 2.31.8وٱعلم يا بنيّ أنّ أحدًا لم ينبئ عن الله سبحانهكما أنبأ
عنه نبيّنا صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله فٱرض َ به رائدًا وإلى النجاة قائدًا. فإن ّ
ي لم آل ُ كَ نصيحةًوإنّك لن تبلغ في النظر لنفسك وإن ٱجتهدت مبلغ نظري لك.
2.31.9وٱعلم يا بنيّ أنّه لو كان لربّك شريك لأتتك رسله ولرأيت آثار ملـكه
وسلطانه ولعرفت أفعاله وصفاته ولـكنّه إل ٰ ه واحد كما وصف نفسه لا ي ُ الو
دحأ هكـلم يف ه ُ ّداض يزول أبدًا ولم يزل أوّل قبل الأشياء بلا أوّلية وآخر
بعد الأشياء بلا نهاية عظم عن أن تثبت ربوبيّته بإحاطة قلب أو بصر. فإذا
عرفت ذلك فٱفعل كما ينبغي لمثلك أن يفعله فيصغرخطرهوقل ّ
ةمقدرتهوكثرةعجزهوعظيمحاجتهإلىربّهفيطلبطاعتهوالرهبة من عقوبته والشفقة من
سخطه فإنّه لم يأمرك إلّا بحسن ولم ينهك إلّا عن قبيح. 2.31.10ّ نإ ّينُ باي
يقدأنبأتكعنالدنياوحالهاوزوالهاوٱنتقالهاوأنبأتكعنالآخرةوما أُعدّ
لأهلهافيهاوضربتلكفيهماالأمثاللتعتبربهاوتحذوعليها.إنّمامَث َ ايندلاَرَ بَخنَمل
َ ثَ مك ءاثعَو اولمتحٱف اًعيرَم اًبانجو اً بيصخ اًلزنم اوّمَأف بيدج لزنم مهب ابَن
رْفَس موق ل الطريق وفراق الصديق وخشونة السفر وجشوبة المطعم ليأتوا سعة
دارهم ومنزل بحأءيشالواًمرغمةقفننوريالواً ملأكلذنمءيشلنودجيسيلفمهرارق ّ
إليهمممّا قرّبهم من منزلهم وأدناهم إلى محلّهم. ومثل من ٱغترّبها كمثل قوم
كانوا بمنزل خصيب فنبا بهم إلى منزل جديب فليس شيء أكره إليهم ولا أفظع
عندهم من مفارقة ما كانوا فيه إلى ما يهجمون عليه ويصيرون إليه. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 581
2.31.8 My dear son! Know that no one has brought God's message in the
man- ner of our Prophet, so take joy in accepting him as your scout for
salvation and your leader. I have never held back from giving you
advice. Though you may strive hard, you will never look out for yourself
as much as I look out for you. 2.31.9 Mydearson!Knowthatif
yourLordhadapartner,hismessengerswould have come to you. You would have
seen the evidence of that deity's kingship and power and recognized his
actions and attributes. But there is only one God---he has described
himself as one,1 and no one can challenge him for his kingdom. As he has
always been, so he will never cease to be. He is first before all
things, yet without beginning, he is last after all things, yet without
end. His majesty is too great to be encompassed by heart or eye. If you
recognize this, do what someone like you should do, a human of little
significance, of meager power,of completeincapacity,ahumaningreatneedof
hisLord---seektoobey him, beware his punishment, and fear his wrath, for
he only ever commands you to do what is right, and he only forbids you
from doing what is wrong. 2.31.10 My dear son! I have told you about
this world, about its condition, its imminent end, and its inexorable
passing. I have told you about the hereafter and what has been prepared
in it for its people. You have been given illustra- tions about both so
that you may learn from them and act upon them. Those
whohavetestedtheworld'srealityarelikeagroupof travelerswho,findingitan
unsatisfactory, drought-stricken abode, seek another that is fertile and
rich in pasture. They patiently suffer the tribulations of the road, the
separation from friends, the roughness of the journey, and the
coarseness of their food, in order to arrive at the vast and lovely
expanse of their new home, their permanent residence. They care nothing
for the pain they must experience on the road, nor do they deem the
expense they must incur an indemnity. Nothing pleases them more than the
things that bring them closer to their permanent abode, that draw them
nearer to their real home. In contrast, those who are taken in by the
world's deceptions are like a group of people who live in a fertile
pasture andleaveitbehindtotraveltoaplaceof
drought.Nothingwillbringthemmore grief
orbemoredevastatingforthemthanleavingthepleasurestheyenjoy,and arriving,
suddenly, at the place to which they must come, and in which they must
stay forever. 1 E.g., Qurʾan, Ikhlāṣ112:1, Naḥl 16:51, Baqarah 2:163.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 582 Text and
Translation 2.31.11يابنيّٱجعلنفسكميزانًافيمابينكوبينغيركفأحببلغيركماتحب ّ
لنفسك وٱكره له ما تكره لها ولا تظلم كما لا تحب ّ أن تظلم وأحسن كما تحب ّ
أن يحسن إليك وٱستقبح من نفسك ما تستقبح من غيرك وٱرْض َ من الناس بما ترضاه
لهم من نفسك ولا تقل ما لا تعلم وإن قلّ ما تعلم ولا تقل ما لا تحب ّ أن
يقال لك وٱعلم أنّ الإعجاب ضدّ الصواب وآفة الألباب فٱسْعَ في كَدْحِك ولا تكن
خازنًا لغيرك وإذا أنت هُديت لقصدك فكن أخشع ما تكون لربّك. 2.31.12وٱعلم أنّ
أمامك طريقًا ذا مسافة بعيدة ومشقّة شديدة وأنّه لا غنى بك فيه عن حسن
الارتياد وقدر بلاغك من الزاد مع خفّة الظهر فلا تحملنّ على ظهرك فوق
طاقتكفيكونثقلذلكوبالًاعليك.وإذاوجدتمنأهلالفاقةمنيحمللكزادك إلى يوم
القيامة في ُ وافيك به غدًا حيث تحتاج إليه فٱغتنمه وحَمِّله إيّاه وأكثر من
تزويده وأنت قادر عليه فلعلّك تطلبه فلا تجده وٱغتنم من ٱستقرضك في حال غناك
ليجعل قضاءه لك في يوم عسرتك. وٱعلم أنّ أمامك عَقبةكَؤودًا المُخ ِ ف ّ فيها
أحسن حالًا من المثقل والمبطئ عليها أقبح أمرًا١ من المسرع وأنّ مَهْبِطها بك لا
محالة على جنّة أو على نار فٱرْت َ دْ لنفسك قبل نزولك ووطّن٢ المنزل قبل حلولك
فليس بعد الموت مُستعت َ ب ولا إلى الدنيا منصرَف. 2.31.13وٱعلمأنّ
الذيبيدهخزائنالسماواتوالأرضقدأذنلكفيالدعاءوتكفّل لك بالإجابة وأمرك أن
تسأله ليعطيك وتسترحمه ليرحمك ولم يجعل بينك وبينه من ملو ةبوتلا نم تأسأ
نإ كعنمي ملو هيلإ كل عفشي نم ىلإ كئِجلُ ي ملو هنع كبُجحَي ١م،ي:كذا.ش،ن،ھ:
⟩حالًا⟨. ٢ن،ي،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.م،ھ،وأصلش،ونسخة فيي: ⟩ووطّئ⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 583
2.31.11 My dear son! How you wish to be treated should be the measure
with which you treat others. Choose for others what you would choose for
yourself, and dislike for them what you dislike for yourself; do not
oppress, just as you would not wish to be oppressed; be good, just as
you would have others be good to you; consider ugly in yourself what you
consider ugly in others; accept from others what you would have them
accept from you; do not speak about things you do not know, even when
there is not much that you do know; do not say things you would not wish
to have said to you. Know that conceit is the enemy of good judgment and
the bane of good minds. Toil hard but do not hoard your wealth for
others to inherit. When you are guided to your purpose, humble yourself
before your Lord. 2.31.12 Know that ahead of you lies a road whose route
is long and whose hard- ships are severe. You must traverse it as well
as you are able and take with you the provisions you will need. Keep
your load light, and do not burden your back beyond its capacity, for a
heavy load will cause a bad outcome.1 Whenever you find a mendicant to
carry your provisions for you till the day of resurrection, such that
tomorrow, when you are in need of them, he can hand them over to
you---take advantage of him, give him your cargo to carry, and load him
up with as many provisions as you are able.2 Do this while you have the
oppor- tunity, for it could happen that you go out to search for him but
cannot find him. Take advantage, too, of any who ask you for a loan on
your day of wealth and defer repayment for your day of hardship. Know
that there is a tough climb before you in which it is better to travel
light than to carry a heavy load, where it is much worse to go slowly
than to go in speed. Know that you must dismount in either paradise or
hell, so seek provisions for your soul before you are made to alight.
Embrace your final home and make it ready before you take up resi-
dence. Remember: After death, there will be no way to please God, and no
way to return to this world. 2.31.13 Know that he whose hands hold the
treasures of the skies and the trea- sures of the earth has permitted
you to petition him and promised to answer. He has commanded you to ask
in order that he may give, he has commanded you to beseech his mercy in
order that he may shower it upon you. He has not placed any veil between
you and him, nor has he required you to seek refuge with anyone who will
intercede for you. If you sin, he does not withhold his 1 The "heavy
load" on your back is a metaphor for sins. 2 "Finding a mendicant to
carry your provisions for you" is an injunction to charity, which will
bring abundant rewards on judgment day. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 584 Text
and Translation يعاجلك بالنقمة ولم يفضحك حيث الفضيحة ولم يشدّد عليك في
قبول الإنابة ولم يناقشك بالجريمة ولم يؤيِسك من الرحمة بل جعل نزوعك عن
الذنب حسنة وحسب سيّئتك واحدة وحسب حسنتك عشرًا وفتح لك باب المتاب فإذا
ناديته سمع نداك هيلإ توكشو كسفن تاذ هتْثَ ثبَأو كتجاحب هيلإ تيضفأف كاوجن
ملع هتيجان اذإو همومك وٱستكشفتهكروبك وٱستعنته على أمورك وسألته من خزائن
رحمته ما لا يقدر على إعطائه غيره من زيادة الأعمار وصحّة الأبدان وسعة
الأرزاق. ثمّجعل في يديك مفاتيح خزائنه بما أذن لك فيه من مسألته فمتى شئت
ٱستفتحت بالدعاء أبواب نعمته وٱستمطرت شآبيب رحمته. فلا ي ُ قنطنّك إبطاء
إجابته فإنّ العطيّة
علىقدرالنيّةوربّماأُخّرتعنكالإجابةليكونذلكأعظملأجرالسائلوأجزللعطاء الآمل
وربّما سألت الشيء فلا تؤتاه وأوتيت خيرًا منه عاجل ً ا أو آجل ً ا أو صرف
عنك ُ رَ لَ ف .كل ريخ وهامل ب ىقبي اميف كتلأسم نكتلفهتيتوأ ول كنيد كالههيف
هتبلط دق رمأ َ ّ .هل ىقبت الو كل ىقبي ال لاملاو هلابو كنع ىفنُ يو هلامج
كل 2.31.14وٱعلم أنّك إنّما خُلقت للآخرة لا للدنيا وللفناء لا للبقاء وللموت
لا للحياة وأنّك هبراه هنم وجني ال يذلا توملا ديرط كّنأو ةرخآلا ىلإ قيرطو
ةغلُ ب رادو ةعلُ ق لزنم يف ولابدّأنّهمدر
كهفكنمنهعلىحذرأنيدرككوأنتعلىحالسيّئةقدكنتتحدّث نفسك منها بالتوبة فيحول
بينك وبين ذلك فإذا أنت قد أهلـكت نفسك. يا بنيّ أكثر من ذ كر الموت وذ كر
ما تَهجُم عليه وت ُ فضي بعد الموت إليه حتّى يأتيك وقد أخذت منه حِذْرك وشددت
له أَزْرك ولا يأتيك ب َ ِ هبُ يفًةتغ ر َ ك. 2.31.15وإيّاك أن ت َ غترّ بما ترى
من إخلاد أهل الدنيا إليها وت َ كأّبن دقف .اهيلع مهبُ لاك الله عنها ونعت لك
نفسها وتكشّفت لك عن مساويها فإنّما أهلها كِلاب ٌ عاوية وسباع al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 585
pardon, nor does he hasten to punish. He does not disgrace you even when
you deserve shame. He does not rebuke while accepting your repentance.
He does not chide you for your crimes or cause you to despair of his
mercy. Rather, he counts it as a good deed when you shun sin. He reckons
your bad deed as a sin- gle bad deed but multiplies your good deeds by
ten. He has opened the door of repentance for you---if you call out to
him, he hears your call, if you whisper to him, he knows your words---so
open your heart and plead with him to take care of you. Divulge to him
your inner self, tell him of your griefs, entreat him to dispel your
sorrows, beseech him to help you in all that you do. Ask him for the
treasures of his mercy, for that is something he alone can bestow. Ask
him for a long life, a healthy body, and abundant providence. God has
placed in your hands the keys to his treasury, for he has permit- ted
you to pray. Whenever you so desire, you can beseech him and unlock the
doors of his favors.Whenever you so desire, you can supplicate him and
receive the copious showers of his mercy. Do not despair if the answer
is slow in com- ing, for the gift will be in proportion to the intent.
Perhaps the answer has been delayed so that the petitioner may receive
yet greater rewards, and the aspirant may obtain yet richer gifts. When
you asked for a thing and it was not given to you, perhaps it was
because you will be given something even better, either here or in the
next world. Perhaps it was turned away for something better. It may so
happen that a thing you requested would have ruined your faith if it
were granted. Ask for things whose beauty you will always cherish and
against whose harm you will be guarded. Wealth will not remain for you,
nor will you remain for it. 2.31.14 Know that you have been created for
the hereafter, not for this world, for annihilation, not existence, for
death, not life.You are in a temporary home, a place for gathering
provisions, a path to the hereafter. Death stalks you. No one who
attempts to flee can escape, for it will inevitably overtake him. Be
watchful lest it seize you in a state of sin. You tell yourself you will
repent later, but death may get in the way---if that happens, you will
have caused your soul to perish. My dear son! Think about death and do
so often. Reflect on what you are rushing toward and where you may be
pitched after death. Make sure death does not take you before you have
taken the warning to heart or girded your loins. Let it not come upon
you suddenly and dash you to the ground! 2.31.15 Beware! Do not be
deceived by the world, do not become like the cov- etous who fight over
her like wild dogs! God has informed you about her reality,
shetoohasgivenyoutidingsof herowndeath,shownyouherrealevils.Areher
people anything but howling dogs and savage predators?Yowling at each
other, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 586 Text and
Translation ضارية يَه ِ رّ بعضها بعضًا ويأكل عزيزها ذليلها ويقهر كبيرها
صغيرها. ن َ عَمٌ مُعقّلة١ وأخرى مهملة قد أضلّت عقولها وركبت مجهولها. س ُ روحُ
عاهةٍب ِ وادٍ وَعْث ٍ ليس لها راعٍ يقيمها ولا مُسيم ٌي ُ سيمها سلـكت بهم
الدنيا طريق العمى وأخذت بأبصارهم عن منار ام اوسنو اهب اوبعلو مهب تبعلف اً
ّبر اهوذخّتٱو اهتمعن يف اوقرغو اهتريح يف اوهاَ تف ىدهلا وراءها. رُوَيدًا ي ُ
ملعٱو قحلَ ي نأ عرسأ نَم كِشوي ناعظألا تدرو دق نأك مالظلا رِفس أنّ من كانت
مطيّته الليل والنهار فإنّه ي ُ سار به وإن كان واقفًا ويقطع المسافة وإن كان
مقيمًا وادعًا. 2.31.16كلبق ناك نم ليبس يف كّنأو كلجأ ودعت نلو كلمأ غلبت نل
كّنأ اً نيقي ملعٱو بُر هّنإف بستكملا يف لمجأو بلطلا يف ضِّفـَ خف ّ طلب قد جرّ
إلى حَرَب وليس كلّ ىلإ كتقاس نإو ةّيند ّلك نع كسفن مركأو مورحمب لِمجُ م ّلك
الو قوزرمب بلاط الرغائب فإنّك لن تعتاض بما تبذل من نفسك عوضًا ولا تكن عبد
غيرك وقد جعلك كب فِجوت نأ كاّيإو رسعب اّلإ لاني ال رسيو ّرشب اّلإ ٢لانُ ي ال
ٍريخُريخ امو ا ً ّرح هللا مطاياالطمعفت ُ
وردكمناهلالهلـكةوإنٱستطعتأنلايكونبينكوبيناللهذونعمة فٱفعل فإنّك مدرك قِسْمك
وآخذ سهمك وإنّ اليسير من الله أكرم وأعظم من الـكثير من خلقه وإن كان كلٌّ
منه. 2.31.17.كقطنم نم تاف ام ككاردإ نم رسيأ كتمص نم طرف ام كيفالَ تو وحفظ
ما في الوعاء بِشَدّ الوِ كاء. وحفظ ما في يديك أحب ّ إليّ من طلب ما في يد
غيرك. ومرارة اليأس خير من الطلب إلى الناس. والحرفة مع العفّة خير من الغنى
مع الفجور. ١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩مغفّلة⟨. ٢م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ،ونسخة
فيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ،ونسخةفيم: ⟩لايوجد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 587 the strong devour the weak, the large attack the small.
Herded and tended camels, some, but others gone loose, having slipped
their ropes and run off in unknown directions. They graze now on foul
weeds in stony valleys, no shep-
herdtowatchthem,noherdsmantoleadthemtograss.Theworldtookthemon the path
of blindness and struck down their beacons of guidance, they drifted in
her perplexities and drowned in her pleasures, they took her as their
lord and master, she toyed with them, and they dallied with her,
forgetting what was coming. But wait, go gently! Darkness will soon give
way to morning. Travelers have already arrived at the watering hole, yet
those who hasten may very well catch up. Know this: If your steeds are
Day and Night, you are driven forward even when you stand still. You cut
the distance to the destination even when you remain motionless and
calm. 2.31.16 Know this with full certainty: Your path is the path of
those before you, and you will not achieve your long hopes and surpass
your allotted lifespan, so be moderate in your pursuits and restrained
in what you seek. A pursuit often leads to deprivation: not every seeker
finds sustenance, while not every per- son of restraint is denied. Honor
yourself by rising above despicable acts, even when they lead to the
fulfilment of your passions, for there is no adequate rec- ompense for
expended honor. Do not become a slave to another when God has
createdyoufree.Whatisthegoodof somethinggoodobtainedthroughevil?Or of
ease obtained through privation? Beware lest ambition's steeds run off
with you and pitch you down at the station of destruction! If you can
arrange things such that no benefactor stands between you and God, then
do so. No matter what, you will attain your destiny and receive your
share, and a little from God is both more in quantity and greater in
worth than a lot from his creatures. Ultimately, everything comes from
him. 2.31.17 Making up for too much silence is easier than retracting
what escapes your lips. Secure your sack by tightening the strap. It is
far better to guard your property than to covet another's.
Itisfarbettertotastethebitternessof resignationthantoimportunepeople. It
is far better for you to combine restraint with employment than to pair
wealth with dissolution. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 588 Text and
Translation والمرء أحفظ لسرّه. ورُب ّ ساعٍ فيما يضرّه. من أكثر أهجر ومن تفكّر
أبصر. ِ بَ تّرشلا لهأ نيابو مهنم نكت ريـخلا لهأ ْنِراق ن عنهم. بئس الطعام
الحرام. وظلم الضعيف أفحش الظلم. .اًقفر قرخلا ناك اً قْرُخ قفرلا ناك اذإ ربّما
كان الدواء داء والداء دواء وربّما نصح غير الناصح وغَش ّ المستنصح. وإيّاك
والاتّكال على المنى فإنّها ب َ .ىكوَ ّنلا عئاض والعقل حفظ التجارب وخير ما
جرّبت ما وعظك. بادر الفرصة قبل أن تكون غُص ّ ة. ليس كلّ طالب يصيب ولا كلّ
غائب يؤوب. ومن الفساد إضاعة الزاد ومَفسدة المعاد. ولكلّ أمر عاقبة. سوف
يأتيك ما ق ُ دّر لك. التاجر مخاطر. ورُب ّ يسير أنمى من كثير. لا خير في
مُعين مَهين ولا في صديق ظَنين. ساهِل الدهر َما ذَلّ لك ق َ عوده. ولا تخاطر
بشيء رجاء أكثر منه. َ مجَ ت نأ كاّيإو ح بك مطيّة اللجاج. 2.31.18احمل نفسك
من أخيك عند صُرْمه على الصلة وعند صدوده على اللطف والمقاربة وعند جُموده على
البذل وعند تباعده على الدنوّ وعند شدّته على اللين وعند al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 589 You protect your own secret best. Often the very thing
you strive for harms you when you get it. Whoever talks too much,
blathers. Associate with good people, and you will be one of them. Stay
away from evil people, and you will be separate from them. How vile is
forbidden food! Oppressing the weak is the worst oppression. If goodness
is stupid, then stupidity is good. Sometimes the cure becomes the
disease. A person who does not intend to often unwittingly gives
counsel, while a well-wisher sometimes unwittingly deceives. Beware of
placing faith in worldly hopes---they are the property of fools.
Learning from experience is smart---the best experience gives good
counsel. Seize opportunities before they are lost. Not every seeker gets
what he wants, and not everyone who goes comes back. To squander
provisions and to spoil your return is to cause your own ruin. Every
affair has a consequence. Your destiny will come to you. A trader takes
risks. A little often produces more than a lot. There is no good in a
contemptible helper or a suspicious friend. Fate is a camel. Loosen its
reins and give it slack as long as it remains docile. Don't risk what
you have in hopes of getting more. Beware lest a quarrel run away with
you. 2.31.18 Maintain bonds of kinship with your brother, even when he
is bent on cutting them. Perform kindnesses for him, even when he shuns
you. Be gen- erous to him, even when he is aloof and close-fisted. Stay
close to him, even when he distances himself. Be kind to him, even when
he is harsh. Placate him, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 590 Text and
Translation جرمه على العذر حتّى كأنّك له عبد وكأنّه ذو نعمة عليك وإيّاك أن
تضع ذلك في غير موضعه أو أن تفعله بغير أهله. لا تتّخذنّ عدوّ صديقك صديقًا
فتعادي صديقك. وٱمح َ ض أخاك النصيحة حسنةكانت أم قبيحة. وتجرّع الغَيظ فإن ّ
ي لم أَرَجُرعة أحلى منها عاقبة ولا ألذّمَغَبّة. ول ِ ن ْ لمن غالظك فإنّه يوشِك أن
يلين لك. وخذ على عدوّك بالفضل فإنّه أحلى الظفرين. وإن أردت قطيعة أخيك
فٱستبقِ له من نفسك بقيّة ترجع إليها إن بدا له ذلك يومًا ما. ومن ظنّ بك خيرًا
فصَدِّق ظنّه. ولا تضيّعنّ حقّ أخيك ٱتّكالًا على ما بينك وبينه فإنّه ليس لك بأخٍ من
أضعت حقّه. ولا يكن أهلك أشقى الخلق بك ولا ترغبنّ فيمن زهد فيك. ولايكوننّ
أخوكأقوىعلىقطيعتكمنكعلىصلتهولايكوننّ علىالإساءةأقوى١ منك على الإحسان. ولا
ي َ كّرس نم ءازج سيلو كعفنو هتّرضم يف ىعسي هّنإف كملظ نم ملظ كيلع ّنرُ بك أن
تسوءه. 2.31.19وٱعلم يا بنيّ أنّ الرزق رزقان رزق تطلبه ورزق يطلبك فإن أنت
لم تأت ِ ه أتاك. ما أقبح الخضوع عند الحاجة والجفاء عند الغنى. إنّما لك من
دنياك ما أصلحت به مثواك وإن كنت جازعًا على ما ت َ تَ ّلَف َ من يديك فٱجزع
على كلّ ما لم يصل إليك. اِسْت َ .هابشأ رومألا ّنإف ناك دق امب نكي مل ام ىلع
َ ّلِد ١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.أصلم،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩أقدر⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 591 even when he is cruel. Behave towards him as though you
were a slave, and he a generous benefactor. But beware lest you do this
where it is not fitting, or with people who are not worthy. To befriend
your friend's enemy is to spurn your friend. Give your brother sincere
advice, whether palatable or unpleasant. Swallow your rage---no other
drink leaves a sweeter taste or has a pleasanter effect. Be kind to one
who is harsh with you, perhaps, then, he will be kinder to you. Be
generous to your enemy---that is the sweetest of the two ways of cele-
brating victory. If
youmustseverrelationswithyourbrother,saveasmallspaceinyourheart for him,
in case, one day, he wants to return. If someone thinks you are good,
prove them right. Don't squander your brother's rights by taking the
bond between you for granted. If you squander his rights, he is no
longer your brother. Don't give your family members the least share of
you. Don't place your desires in those indifferent to you. Don't let
your brother be more capable of severing himself from you than you of
associating with him. Don't let him be more capable of meanness than you
are of being kind. Don't be unduly troubled by an oppressor's
oppression. Know that he harms himself and benefits you---don't reward
someone who benefits you by doing him harm. 2.31.19 My dear son! Know
that providence is of two types---the one you seek and the one that
seeks you. If you don't find it, it will find you. Howloathsomeisashowof
humilityintimesof need,andaloofnessintimes of affluence! Your greatest
assets are the deeds you carry to the grave. If you would bewail the
loss of what you once had, then bewail too the absence of things you
never had. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 592 Text and
Translation ولا تكوننّ ممّن لا تنفعه العظة إلّا إذا بالغت في إيلامه فإنّ
العاقل يتّعظ بالآداب والبهائم لا تتّعظ إلّا بالضرب. اطرح عنك واردات الهموم١
بعزائم الصبر وحسن اليقين. من ترك القصد جار. الصاحب مناسب. والصديق من صدق
غَيب ُ ه. والهوى شريك العمى. رُب ّ بعيد أقرب من قريب وقريب أبعد من بعيد.
والغريب من لم يكن له حبيب. من تعدّى الحقّ ضاق مذهبه. ومن ٱقتصر على ق َ
دْرهكان أبقى له. وأوثق سبب أخذت به سبب بينك وبين الله سبحانه. ِ لابُ ي مل
نم ك فهو عدوّك. قد يكون اليأس إدراكًا إذا كان الطمع هلاكًا. ليس كلّ عورة
تظهر ولا كلّ فرصة تصاب. وربّما أخطأ البصير قصده وأصاب الأعمى رشده. أَخِّر
الشرّفإنّك إذا شئت تعجّلته. وقطيعة الجاهل تعدل صلة العاقل. من أَمِنَ الزمان
خانه ومن أعظمه أهانه. ليس كلّ من رمى أصاب. إذا تغيّر السلطان تغيّر الزمان.
سَلْ عن الرفيق قبل الطريق وعن الجار قبل الدار. إيّاك أن تذ كر من الكلام ما
كان مضحكًا وإن حكيت ذلك عن غيرك. ١م،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفين:كذا.ن،ونسخةفيش:
⟩الأمور⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 593
Expect what will happen by extrapolating from what has happened---histo-
ry repeats.1 Don't heed counsel only when it haunts you and causes you
pain. A rational person takes counsel from rebuke. Only cattle are
counseled by the whip. Cast off the fevers of anxiety with patient
resolve and seemly conviction. To leave the middle road is to deviate.
Friends are like kin. A friend is true in your absence. Passion blinds.
Those far are often closer than those close.Those close are often
farther than those far. The real exile is the person who has no one to
love. Whoever transgresses the truth finds his path closing in on him.
Whosoever limits himself to his capacity abides. The sturdiest rope is
the one that links you to God. A person who doesn't care for your
wellbeing is your enemy. Accepting that hopes may not be realized could
lead to their realization, whereas coveting them could lead to your
destruction. Not every gap in a fortress can be breached. Not every
opportunity can be availed. Sometimes the perceptive miss the target and
the blind hit the mark. Impede evil, else you may hasten its onset.
Dissociating from a fool is equal to befriending an intelligent man.
Trust the world and you will be deceived by it. Venerate the world and
you will be reviled by it. Not every arrow hits the mark. New ruler, new
age. Before beginning a journey, inspect your fellow travelers. Before
buying a house, inspect your neighbors. Beware of cracking unseemly
jokes, even when attributing them to another. 1 Ar. inna l-umūra
ashbāhun, lit. "all things are the same." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 594 Text
and Translation 2.31.20وإيّاك ومُشاورة النساء فإنّ رأيهنّ إلى أَفْن وعزمهنّ إلى
وَهن وٱكفف عليهنّ من أبصارهنّ بحجابك إيّاهنّ فإنّ شدّة الحجاب أبقى عليهنّ وليس
خروجهنّ بأشدّ من ةأرملا كِّ لـَ مُ ت الو .لعفٱف كريغ نفرعي ال نأ تعطسٱ نإو
ّنهيلع هب قثوي ال نم كلاخدإ من أمرها ما جاوز نفسها فإنّ المرأة ريحانة
وليست بقَهْر َ مانة ولا ت َ عدُبكرامتها نفس َ ها ولا ت ُ ىلإةحيحصلاوعديكلذ
ّنإفةريَ غعضومريغيفرُ ياغتلاوكاّيإو.اهريغلعفشتنأاهعِمط السقم والبريئة إلى
الريب. 2.31.21وٱجعل لكلّ إنسان من خَدَمك عمل ً ا تأخذه به فإنّه أحرى أن لا
يتواكلوا في خدمتك. وأكرم عشيرتك فإنّهم جناحك الذي به تطير وأصلك الذي إليه
تصير ويدك التي بها تصول.
2.31.22أستودعاللهدينكودنياك.وأسالهخيرالقضاءلكفيالعاجلةوالآجلةوالدنيا
والآخرة إن شاء الله. 2.32ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية وأرديت جيل ً
ا من الناس كثيرًا خدعتهم بغيّك وألقيتهم في موج بحرك تغشاهم الظلمات وتتلاطم
بهم الشبهات فجاروا عن وجهتهم ونكصوا على أعقابهم وتول ّ وا على أدبارهم
وعَوّلوا على أحسابهم إلّا من فاءَمن أهل البصائر فإنّهم فارقوك بعد معرفتك
وهربوا إلى الله من مُوازرتك إذ حملتهم على الصعب وعدلت بهم عن القصد. فٱتّق
الله يا معاوية في نفسك وجاذِب الشيطان قيادك فإنّ الدنيا منقطعة عنك والآخرة
قريبة منك. والسلام. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 595
2.31.20 Beware of seeking advice from women, for their opinion can be
weak and their resolve can waiver.1 Employ the veil to shade their eyes,
for strict veiling preserves modesty; also, private visits from
untrustworthy men are as harmful as going out unveiled---if you can,
make it so that they know only you. Don't allow a woman to govern
affairs other than her own, for a woman is a fragrant flower, not a
manager of affairs; don't allow your generosity to her extend beyond her
to another, don't encourage her to intercede for oth- ers. Beware, on
the other hand, of irrational jealousy, for jealousy leads the healthy
wife to sickness and the innocent one to engage in suspicious behav-
ior. 2.31.21 Make every individual under your command responsible for
his own particular task. If you do, he will be less likely to slacken
and point a fin- ger. Honor your kinsmen. They are the wings with which
you fly, the tree on which you lean, and the hand with which you attack.
2.31.22 I place your religious and your worldly affairs in God's care. I
beseech him to ordain for you everything good, now and later, both in
this world and the hereafter, if he so wills, Inshāʾallāh! 2.32 From a
letter by ʿAlī to Muʿāwiyah:2 Youhavedestroyedawholegenerationof
people,deceivingthemwithyourevil ways and pitching them into the waves
of your turbulent sea, where they were engulfed in darkness and tossed
hither and thither by doubt. Straying from the
destination,theyspunontheirheels,turnedtheirbacksonreligion,andplaced
their faith in ties of kinship---except for the few who were discerning.
When you mounted the latter on refractory camels and led them off the
straight path, they recognized your misguidance and fled, leaving your
service to return to God. Fear God for your own sake, Muʿāwiyah, and
wrench your halter out of Satan's hands. Very soon, the world will sever
its rope from you. The hereafter has drawn near. Go in peace. 1 Some of
these lines, alongside a few others in which women are referred to
harshly in this volume, are usually read as an indirect rebuke of the
Prophet's widow ʿĀʾishah, who led an army against ʿAlī at the Battle of
the Camel (see also §1.77, §2.1, and accompanying notes). 2 Excerpt from
a letter within a series of acrimonious exchanges, presumably in the
lead-up to the Battle at Ṣiffīn in 37/657. Preceding part of ʿAlī's
letter in B 859; Ḥ16:133, and Muʿāwiyah's reply and the full exchange,
in Ḥ16:133--137. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 596 Text and
Translation 2.33ةّكم ىلع هلماع وهو ساّبعلا نب مَثُ ق ىلإ مالسلا هيلع هل باتك
نمو أمّا بعد. فإنّ عيني بالمغرب كتب إليّ يعلمني أنّه وُجّه على الموسم أُناس ٌ
من أهل الشام العُمي القلوب الصمّ الأسماع الكُمه الأبصار الذين يلتمسون الحقّ
بالباطل ويطيعون المخلوق في معصية الخالق ويحتلبون الدنيا دَرّها بالدين
ويشترون عاجلها بآجل الأبرار المتّقين ولن يفوز بالخـير إلّا عامله ولا يجزى
جزاء الشرّ إلّا فاعله. فأقم على ما في يديك رَذتعُ ي امو كاّيإ⟩و همامإل عيطملا
هناطلسل عباتلاو بيبللا حصانلاو بيلصلا مزاحلا مايق منه⟨ولا تكن عند
النعماء ب َ َ ف ءاسأبلا دنع الو اً رِط شِل ً ا. 2.34رصم نع رتشألاب هلزع نم
هد ُ ّجوت هغلب اّ مل ركب يبأ نب دّمحم ىلإ مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو ثمّتوف ّ
ي١ الأشتر في توجّهه إلى مصر قبل وصوله إليها وقد بلغني مَوجِدتك من تسريح
الأشتر إلى عملك وإن ّ ي لم أفعل ذلك ٱستبطاء لك في الجهد ولا ٱزديادًا لك
في الجِدّ ولو نزعت رسيأ وه ام كتيّ لول كناطلس نم كدي تحت ام ُ عليك مؤونة
وأعجب إليك وِلاية. إنّ الرجل الذي كنت ً لجر ناك رصم رمأ هتيّ لو ُ ا هنع
نحنو همامِح ىقالو هماّيأ لمكتسٱ دقلف هللا همحرف اً مقان اًديدش انّودع ىلعو اً
حصان انل راضون أَوْلاه الله رضوانه وضاعف الثواب له. فأَصحِر لعدوّك وٱمضِ على
بصيرتك٢ وشَمِّر لحرب من حاربك وٱدعُ إلى سبيل ربّك وأَكثِر الاستعانة بالله ي َ
كفِك ما أهمّك .هللا ءاش نإ كب لزني ام ىلع كنِعُ يو
١ن،م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.أصلش: ⟩س ُ .⟨ َ ّم ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا. أصلم:
⟩سيرتك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 597
2.33 From ʿAlī's dispatch to Qutham ibn al-ʿAbbās, his governor in
Mecca:1 Myagentin thewesthaswrittentoinformmethatagroupof
Syrians---blindof heart, deaf of ear, and weak of eye---are being sent
to Mecca this hajj season. They claim to establish a right through wrong
means, obey a human, a crea- ture, while disobeying the creator,2 and
attempt to milk the world's udders in the name of religion. They
purchase the temporary benefits of this realm and sell off the reward
promised to the pious and godfearing. But good will be won only by those
who practice good, while the recompense of those who practice evil will
be nothing but evil. Govern your city well---be astute, strong, sincere,
and thoughtful, a man who follows his leader and obeys his Imam. ⟨Beware
of an action you must justify.⟩3 Do not exult in times of prosperity or
despair in times of distress. 2.34 From ʿAlī's letter to Muḥammad ibn
Abī Bakr, upon learning of Muḥammad's dis- tress at being replaced by
Ashtar as governor of Egypt (Ashtar died en route):4 I have learned that
you are distressed at my sending Ashtar to take charge of your region.
That was not because I found you remiss in your efforts or less diligent
than I would have wished---although I retracted the authority I had
placed in your hands, I had intended to replace it with a governorship
that would have been easier for you to handle and more fulfilling. The
man I sent as the new governor of Egypt---may God have mercy on
him!---was sin- cere in his love for me and a fierce enemy to my foe.
But he has finished his days and met his end. I am pleased with his
deeds---may God too be pleased with him and multiply his reward. Now go
out and confront your enemy. Be guided by your discerning mind, gird up
to fight your attacker, call to the path of your Lord, and beseech God
repeatedly for aid. He will dispel your grief and help you to combat the
calamities that have come your way, if he so wills. 1 From Kufa, just
prior to the hajj season, in Dhū al-Ḥijjah, 39/659, warning Qutham about
the imminent arrival in Mecca of Muʿāwiyah's troops under Yazīd ibn
Shajarah al-Rahāwī. B 859; Ḥ16:138--139. Context and text in Thaqafī,
Ghārāt, 2:504--510. 2 Echoes a well-known hadith, ⟨Do not obey humans if
it means you will disobey God⟩ (لا طاعة لمخلوق في معصية الخالق .)Quḍāʿī,
Shihāb, §6.24. 3 Proverb. R 3:381. 4 From Kufa to Egypt in 38/658.
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:87. See next text, §2.35, for ʿAlī's grief when
Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr too was killed. "Ashtar died" (tuwuffiya
al-Ashtar), or, as per ms Sh, "Ashtar was poisoned" (summa al-Ashtar).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 598 Text and
Translation 2.35ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى عبد الله بن العبّاس بعد مقتل
محمّد بن أبي بكر بمصر ُ تسٱ دق هللا همحر ركب يبأ نب دّمحمو تحتُ تفٱ دق رصم
ّنإف .دعب اّمأ شهد فعند الله نحتسبه ً لماعو اً حصان اًدلو هقاحَل ىلع سانلا
تْثَ ثَح تنك دقو .اًعفاد اً نكرو اًعطاق اًفيسو اًحداك ا مهنمو اًهراك يتآلا مهنمف
اًءدبو اًدْوَعو اً رهجو ا ً ّرس مهتوعدو ةعقولا لبق هثايغب مهترمأو َ تعُ ملا لّ
كاذبًا ومنهم القاعد خاذلًا أسأل الله أن يجعل لي منهم فرجًا عاجل ً ا فوالله
لولا طمعي عند لقائي عدوّي في الشهادة وتوطيني نفسي على المنيّة لأحببت أن لا
أبقى مع هؤلاء يومًا واحدًا ولا ألتقي بهم أبدًا. 2.36ومن كتاب له عليه السلام
في ذ كر جيش أنفذه إلى بعض الأعداء وهو جواب كتاب كتبه إليه أخوه عقيل بن
أبي طالب فسرّحت إليه جيشًا كثيفًا من المسلمين فلمّا بلغه ذلك شمّر هاربًا ونكص
نادمًا فلحقوه فقومكاّلإناكامف.الوالَكاً
ئيشاولتتقٱفبايإللسمشلاتلّفطدقوقيرطلاضعبب .اجَن ام ٍيألِ ب اًيألف قَمَ ّرلا ريغ
هعم قبي ملو قَ ّنخُملاب هنم ذخُأ ام دعب اًضيرج اجن ىّتح ةعاس al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 599
2.35 From ʿAlī's letter to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, after Muḥammad ibn
Abī Bakr was killed in Egypt:1 Egypt has been conquered, and Muḥammad
ibn Abī Bakr---may God have mercy on him!---has gained martyrdom. I seek
God's recompense for enduring the pain of his death! He was a sincere
son, a diligent governor, a cutting sword, and a pillar of support. I
had urged people to succor him ahead of the skirmish and commanded them
to come to his aid, and I pleaded with them early and
often,inprivateandinpublic,buttonoavail---afewreluctantlystoodup,some
gave insincere excuses, and others sat back and flatly refused.2 I
entreat God to grant me swift relief from their company! By God, were I
not hoping for martyr- dom when I meet the enemy in battle, had I not
trained myself to face death in combat, I would prefer not to stay among
these people for another day, I would wish never to see them again! 2.36
From ʿAlī's reply to a letter from his brother ʿAqīl ibn Abī Ṭālib,
describing the movements of a military unit he had sent against one of
his enemies:3 I dispatched a large army of Muslims to fight him. When he
learned of its com- ing, he tucked up his garments and fled, regretting
his incursion, and attempt- ing to retreat. They caught up with him on a
certain road just as the sun was about to set, and the two sides
exchanged quick blows.4 After a short hour's skirmish, in which he was
personally grabbed by the throat and had his breath squeezed out of him,
he escaped, choking on his spittle. He escaped, but only with terrible
effort. 1 From Kufa to Basra in 38/658 (Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:109). Muḥammad
ibn Abī Bakr, ʿAlī's foster- son and ward, and his governor in Egypt,
was tortured and killed by Muʿāwiyah's commander, ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ. 2
ʿAlī's public and private orations urging his supporters to mobilize and
aid Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr are recorded in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:107--108. 3
Excerpt from a post-Ṣiffīn reply from Kufa in 39/659 to ʿAqīl in Medina,
describing the raids of Muʿāwiyah's commander Ḍaḥḥāk on Iraqi towns, and
the actions of ʿAlī's comman- der Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī, at the head of four
thousand men, against him. Details of events in Ḥ 2:113--125, ʿAqīl's
letter to ʿAlī and ʿAlī's full reply in Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 295--297;
Ḥ2:118-- 120. 4 Ar. fa-qtatalū shayʾan ka-lā wa-lā, lit. "They fought
for a bit like no and no!" ⟨Like no and no⟩(ka-lā wa-lā) is an idiom
signifying something quick and fleeting, onomatopoeic for the staccato
shortness of the repeated single-syllable lā. B 863; F 381; Ḥ16:149.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 600 Text and
Translation مهّنإفهيتلايفمهحامِجوقاقشلايفمهلاوجَتولالضلايفمهَضاكرَ
تواًشيرقكنععَدف قد أجمعوا على حربي كإجماعهم على حرب رسول الله صل ّ َ زَ جف
يلبق هلآو هيلع هللا ى ت قريشًا عنّي الجوازي فقد قطعوا رحمي وسلبوني سلطان
ٱبن أمّي. وأمّا ما سألت َ عنه من ةّزع يلوح سانلا ةرثك ينديزي ال .هللا ىقلأ
ىّتح نيّلِ حُملا لاتق ييأر ّنإف لاتقلا يف ييأر ولا تفرّقهم عنّي وحشة. ولا
تحسبنّ ٱبن أبيك ولو أسلمه الناس متضرّعًا متخشّعًا ولا ِ لَس الو اً نهاو ميضلل اً
ّرقم س الزمام للقائد ولا وَطئ الظهر للراكب المقتعد ولـكنّهكما قال أخو بني
سُليم١ َ ت ْنِإَ ف فْيَك يِنيِ لَأْس َ أَنْت يِنَ ّنِإَ ف َ ٰ لَ عٌروُ بَص ى رَيْب بيِ لَص ِناَمَ
ّزلا ِ ٗ ي َ عِـ ـَ لَ ع ُ ّزـ ـِ ب ىٰرُ ت ْنَأ َ ّيـ ـَ بآَك يـ ـةٌ َ يَ ف شْمَت َ
عَـ ـادٍ أَوْ ي ُ سَـ ـاءُحَبِيب ٗ 2.37ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية
فسبحاناللهماأشدّ لزومكللأهواءالمبتدعةوالحـيرةالمتّبعةمعتضييعالحقائقوٱطّراح
الوثائق التي هي لله طلبة وعلى عباده حجّة. فأمّا إكثارك الحِجاج في عثمان
وقتلته فإنّك إنّما نصرت َ عثمان حيث كان النصر لك وخذلته حيث كان النصر له.
والسلام. ١البحر:الطويل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 601
Don't speak to me of Quraysh! They have raced into error, galloped into
dis- sent, and bolted into the waterless waste. They have banded to
fight me, just as they banded earlier to fight God's Messenger. May
Quraysh be repaid as they deserve! They have cut the bonds of my kinship
and looted the authority given
tomebymybrother,Muḥammad.1Youhaveaskedaboutmyviewonfighting--- here it
is: I shall continue to fight all who break their pledge of allegiance
until I meet God. My might is not increased by large numbers, nor do I
grow uneasy if they disperse. Don't think that I, your brother will be
broken or humbled, even if I am abandoned by any and all! You will not
find me weak in the face of oppression, like a docile camel, or one with
a broad back on which a rider can sit in comfort. In the words of the
Sulaym tribesman:2 If you asked, "How do you fare?" I would answer: I am
patient and I am strong in the face of fate's attacks. I do not allow
myself to show distress, Lest my enemy gloat, and my friend grieve. 2.37
From a letter sent by ʿAlī to Muʿāwiyah:3
GreatGod!Howferventlyyouclingtoyouroutlandishpassionsandyourobses- sive
machinations! How blatantly you disregard the facts and reject God's
com- pacts that are proofs against his servants! You make repeated
arguments in the matter of ʿUthmān and his killers, but the reality is
that you are only coming forward to defend ʿUthmān now in order to help
yourself. You abandoned him earlier, when you could have helped him. Go
in peace. 1 Lit. "my mother's son" (ibn ummī), refers to ʿAlī's
closeness to Muḥammad generally, and to the fact that he was raised by
ʿAlī's parents. F 382; R 3:126--127; Ḥ16:151; B 832. "Muḥammad" is added
to the translation for clarity. 2 Attributed to ʿAbbās ibn Mirdās
al-Sulamī, a pagan poet and warrior who converted to Islam after the
Conquest of Mecca (d. bet. 18/639 and 36/656). B 863; Ḥ16:152. 3
Presumably from Kufa to Damascus in 36/656, or at Ṣiffīn before the
battle in 37/657. Earlier part in B 83; Ḥ16:153--154; details of
Muʿāwiyah's withholding of aid in the face of ʿUthmān's pleas in B 864;
Ḥ16:154, after Balādhurī. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 602 Text and
Translation 2.38ّ لو اّ مل رصم لهأ ىلإ مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو ى عليهم
الأشتر رحمه الله من عبد الله عليّ أمير المؤمنين إلى القوم الذين غضبوا لله
حين عُصِي في أرضه وذُهِب بحقّه فضَرب الجور س ُ رادقه على البرّوالفاجر والمقيم
والظاعن فلا معروف ي ُ ستراح إليه ولا منكر يتناهى عنه. أمّا بعد. فقد بعثت
ءادعألا نع لَكْنـَ ي الو فوخلا ماّيأ ماني ال هللا دابع نم اًدبع مكيلإ ُ وخأ
ثراحلا نب كلام وهو رانلا قيرح نم راّجفلا ىلع ّدشأ عوَ ّرلا تاعاس مَذْح ِ ج.
فٱسمعوا له وأطيعوا أمره فيما طاب َ قَ الحقّ فإنّه سيف من سيوف الله لا كليلُ
رمأ نإف ةبيرضلا يبان الو ةب ُ ّظلا كم أن تنفروا فٱنفروا وإن أمر كم أن
تقيموا فأقيموا فإنّه لا يقدم ولا يحجم ولا يؤخّر ولا يقدّم إلّا عن أمري. وقد
آثرتكم به على نفسي لنصيحته لـكم وشدّة شكيمته على عدوّكم. 2.39ومن كتاب له
عليه السلام إلى عمرو بن العاص َ ي هرتس كوتهم هُ ّيَغ ٍرهاظ ٍئرمٱ ايندل
اًعَبَت كنيد تلعج كّنإف شين الـكريم بمجلسه وي ُ سَفِّه تعبّتٱف هتطلُ خب ميلحلا َ
أثره وطلبت فضله ٱتّباع الكلب للضِّرغام يلوذ إلى مَخالبه وينتظر ما يلقى إليه
من فضل فريسته فأذهبت َ دنياك وآخرتك ولو بالحقّ أخذت أدركت ما al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 603
2.38 From a letter sent by ʿAlī to the people of Egypt, when he sent
Ashtar to them as their governor:1 From God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander
of the Faithful, to the people who rose up in anger for the sake of God,
when God was disobeyed on earth and his dues were flouted, when tyranny
raised its canopy over pious and debauched, over resident and traveler,
when good was no longer pursued, and evil was no longer hindered.2 I
have sent you one of God's own servants, who neither sleeps during the
days of danger, nor shrinks from confronting the enemy in the hours of
terror. He is more ardent in attacking the wicked than a blazing fire.
He is Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith, from the tribe of Madhḥij. Listen to him and
obey his command in everything that accords with the truth, for he is
one of God's own swords. His blade is far from blunt, his blow is never
weak. March when he commands you to march, halt when he commands you to
halt, for he advances and withdraws,
delaysandproceeds,onlyatmycommand.Iwouldwishtokeephimbymyside, but have
sent him to you instead, because he is sincere in his wish to guide you
and unyielding in his severity toward your enemy. 2.39 From a letter
sent by ʿAlī to ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ:3 You have subordinated your faith to
the worldly gain promised to you by a man whose deceit is plain, whose
dishonor is manifest, who uses his assemblies to slander the noble, and
who transforms mature associates into fools. You fol- low in his
footsteps and seek his favors like a dog trailing a lion, begging for
largesse, and waiting for whatever scraps of prey it might toss your
way. You 1 Kufa, 38/658. ʿAlī sent Ashtar to replace Muḥammad ibn Abī
Bakr as governor of Egypt when a group there turned to Muʿāwiyah and
Muḥammad was besieged. Ashtar was poisoned by Muʿāwiyah's agent en
route. This letter was found among his belongings. Details in Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 5:95--97; Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:193--194; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
282--284 (text of letter, 283-- 284). Other relevant letters are §2.53
and §2.62. 2 The reference is to the Egyptians' displeasure with
ʿUthmān's rule, which resulted in a del- egation demanding reform or
abdication. Ḥ16:156--157 and B 864: ʿAlī was supportive of the
Egyptians' grievances, but not of ʿUthmān's killing. 3 From Kufa to
Damascus in 36/656, before leaving for Ṣiffīn. Text, context, and ʿAmr's
reply, in Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 110--111;Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj, 1:267.
Earlier part of ʿAlī's letter in B 865; Ḥ16:163. ʿAmr had
agreedtosupportMuʿāwiyahagainstʿAlī,inexchangefor the governorshipof
Egypt. Ḥ16:160--161. Earlier, ʿAmr had been in command of the Muslim
army that had conquered Egypt during the caliphate of ʿUmar, who then
dismissed him for corruption. "Whose dis-
honorismanifest,"lit."whoseveilisrent"(mahtūkinsitruhu)."AbūSufyān'sson"isMuʿāwiyah.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 604 Text and
Translation ِزْجَأ نايفس يبأ نبٱ نمو كنم هللا نِكمُ ي نإف .تبلط امف ايقبَتو
ازِجعُ ت نإو امتمّدق امب امك أمامكما شرّلـكما. والسلام. 2.40ومن كتاب له عليه
السلام إلى بعض عمّاله أمّا بعد. فقد بلغني عنك أمر إن كنت فعلته فقد أسخطت
ربّك وعصيت إمامك وأخزيتأمانتكبلغنيأنّكجَردت َ
الأرضفأخذتماتحتقدميكوأكلتماتحت يديك فٱرفع إليّ حسابك وٱعلم أنّ حساب الله
أعظم من حساب الناس. 2.41ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى بعض عمّاله أمّا بعد.
فإن ّ ي كنت أشركتك في أمانتي وجعلتك شِعاري وب ِ طانتي ولم يكن في أهلي ىلع
نامزلا تيأر اّملف .ّيلإ ةنامألا ءادأو يترزاوُمو يتاساوُ مل يسفن يف كنم قثوأ
لجر ٱبن عمّك قد كَل ِ ١تنتُ ف دق ةّمألا هذهو تيزخ دق سانلا ةنامأو بِرَح دق
ّودعلاو ب تبَ لَ ق ترغَشو َ لٱبن عمّك ظهر المِج َ نّ ففارقته مع المفارقين
وخذلته مع الخاذلين وخُنْته مع الخائنين فلا ٱبن عمّك آسَيت ولا الأمانة أدّيت
وكأنّك لم تكن الله َتريد بجهادك
وكأنّكلمتكنعلىبيّنةمنربّكوكأنّكإنّماكنتتكيدهذهالأمّةعندنياهموتنوي ةبْثَولا
تلجاعو ةّركـلا تعرسأ ةّمألا ةنايخ يف ةّدشلا كتنكمأ اّملف مهئيَ ف نع مهتّرِغ
وٱختطفت ما قدرت عليه من أموالهم الم َ صونة لأراملهم وأيتامهم ٱختطاف
الذئب ١ن،م،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.ي،وأصلش،ونسخةفيم: ⟩فتكت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 605 have lost out in this world and in the hereafter, when
you could have achieved your desires through rightful means. Beware! If
God grants me victory over you and Abū Sufyān's son, I will requite you
like for like. But should you elude me and manage to stay alive, beware:
what lies ahead is much worse. Go in peace. 2.40 From a letter sent by
ʿAlī to one of his governors:1 Iam
informedthatyouhavedonesomething,which,if youhavedoneit,means you have
angered your Lord, disobeyed your Imam, and betrayed your trust. I am
informed that you stripped the land bare, devoured whatever was under
your control, and consumed whatever you could lay your hands on. Send me
your accounts, then, and know that God's accounting is more stringent
than man's! 2.41 From a letter sent by ʿAlī to one of his governors:2 I
had shared my charge with you and kept you as close to me as an intimate
garment, I trusted none of my family to support and serve me, to stay
true to his charge, more than I trusted you. But when you saw that the
age had turned rabid against your cousin, the enemy was attacking with
savage madness, the people were becoming increasingly corrupt, and the
community had risen up in revolt and abandoned me, you turned your
shield in your cousin's face.3 You left me, along with all the others;
you abandoned me, along with all the others; you betrayed me, along with
all the others. You failed to support your cousin or fulfill your trust.
When you fought beside me earlier, you appear to have had something
other than God's cause in mind, to have never truly held a mandate from
your Lord; you appear to have been deceiving this community in order to
defraud them, as though, all along, you had intended to cheat them of
their war gains. For when you saw the opportunity to swindle, you were
swift to charge and quick to attack. You swooped and ran off with
whatever money you could 1 The governor is ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās in
Basra and ʿAlī's letter---sent from Kufa sometime after Nahrawān, in
38/658---was prompted by a complaint written to him by his treasurer
there, Abū al-Aswad al-Duʾalī (Balādhurī, Ansāb, 2:170; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih,
ʿIqd, 5:103). §2.43, ʿAlī's letter to Maṣqalah ibn Hubayrah, governor in
Ardashīr, Fars, contains similar language. 2 Excerpt from a letter
likely sent from Kufa to Mecca in 40/661 to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās, a
short while before ʿAlī's death; §2.22, and its variant rendering,
§2.66, is possibly another part from the same letter (text and context
in Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:205), and perhaps also §2.72. Details of event in
note to §2.22. Text of §2.41 in Balādhurī, Ansāb, 2:175--176; Ibn
al-ʿAbbās's reply, and ʿAlī's further reply in B 867. 3 An action
usually taken in the face of an enemy, denotes disloyalty; cf. proverb:
⟨Turned the face of his shield⟩(qalaba ẓahr al-mijann). Ḥ16:169; ʿA 690;
R 3:136--137; F 382. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 606 Text and
Translation هذخأنممّثأتمريغهلمحبردصلابيحرزاجحلاىلإهتلمحفةريسكـلاىزعِ
ملاَةيماد ّلزَألا
كأنّكلاأبالغيركحَدَرْتإلىأهلكتراثًامنأبيكوأمّك.فسبحاناللهأماتؤمنبالمعاد أوما
تخاف ن ِ قاش الحساب. أيّها المعدود كان عندنا من ذوي الألباب كيف ت ُ سيغ
شرابًا وطعامًا وأنت تعلم أنّك تأكل حرامًا وتشرب حرامًا وتبتاع الإماء وتنكح
النساء من مال اليتامى والمساكين والمؤمنين والمجاهدين الذين أفاء الله
عليهم هذه الأموال وأحرز بهم هذه البلاد. فٱتّق الله وٱردد إلى هؤلاء القوم
أموالهم فإنّك إن لم تفعل ثمّ أمكننياللهمنكلأُعذِرنّ
إلىاللهفيكولأضربنّكبسيفيالذيماضربتبهأحدًاإلّا دخل النار. ووالله لو أنّ الحسن
والحسين فعلا مثل الذي فعلت ما كانت لهما عندي هَوادة ولا ظَفِرا منّي بإرادة
حتّى آخذ الحقّ منهما وأزيح الباطل عن مَظلِمتهما. وأُقسم بالله رب ّ العالمين
ما يسرّني أنّ ما أخذت َ ه من أموالهم حلال لي أتر كه ميراثًا لمن بعدي فضَحِّ
رُوَيْدًا فكأنّك قد بلغت المدى ودُفنت تحت الثرى وعُرضت عليك أعمالك بالمحلّ الذي
ينادي الظالم فيه بالحسرة ويتمنّى المضيِّـع الرجعة ﴿وَلَات .﴾ٍصاَ نَم َنيِح َ
والسلام. 2.42هلزعف نيرحبلا ىلع هلماع ناكو ّيموزخملا ةمَ لَس يبأ نب رمع ىلإ
مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو هناكم ّيقَرُ ّزلا نالْجَع نب نامعنلا لمعتسٱو أمّا
بعد. فإن ّ الو كل ّمذ الب كدي تعزنو نيرحبلا ىلع نالجع نب نامعنلا تيّ لو
دق ي تثريب عليك فلقد أحسنت الوِلاية وأدّيت الأمانة فأقبل غير ظَنين ولا مَلوم
ولا متّه َ م al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 607
grab---money held in trust for their widows and orphans---like a
lean-hipped wolf pouncing and snatching a bleeding, limping goat. You
blithely carried it away to Mecca, without deeming your appropriation a
crime, as though you--- may other people be deprived of fathers!---were
gifting to your family property inherited from your father and mother!1
Great God! Do you not believe in the return to him? Do you not fear
interrogation at the reckoning? I counted you among the intelligent! How
can you eat and drink when you know that what
youeatanddrinkisillicit?Howcanyoupurchaseslave-girlsandmarrywomen, using
money that belongs to orphans and beggars, to believers, to warriors on
whom God has bestowed these properties, and through whom God has pro-
tected these lands? Fear God and return their property! If you do not,
and if God places you in my power, I shall redeem myself before him by
punishing
youappropriately.Ishallstrikeyouwithmysword,aswordthathasthrustevery man
it has struck into the Fire of Hell. By God, if Ḥasan and Ḥusayn had
done whatyouhavedone,theywouldhavemetwithnoleniencyfromme,norwould they
have gotten their way! I would have wrested from them what was due and
redressed the injustice wrought by their actions. I swear this by God,
Lord of all the peoples---I would not even wish to own lawfully what you
have usurped of the community's property, or to leave it as inheritance
for those who live after
me.⟨Pasturelightlyintheforenoon!⟩2Think:howwillitbewhenyoureachthe end
of your path and are buried beneath the earth, when your deeds are laid
before you in that abode where the tyrant cries out in despair and the
wicked begs for a chance to return?3 «But it will be too late then to
escape!»4 2.42 From a missive sent by ʿAlī to ʿUmar ibn Abī Salamah
al-Makhzūmī, his governor in Bahrain, discharging him and replacing him
with al-Nuʿmān ibn ʿAjlān al-Zuraqī:5 I have appointed al-Nuʿmān ibn
ʿAjlān over Bahrain and discharged you with- out censure or reproach.You
undertook your duties as governor admirably and fulfilled the trust I
had placed in you. Come to me, then, without blame, liabil- 1 "To
Mecca," lit. "to the Ḥijāz," western Arabia, where Mecca and Medina are
located. 2 Ar. ḍaḥḥi ruwaydan, an idiom enjoining restraint. Two
interpretations: (1) The verb ḍaḥḥā means to allow camels to pasture
only very lightly in the forenoon (ḍuḥā), to ensure they can resume
walking swiftly without needing to rest. Ḥ16:169; B 868; R 3:138--139.
(2) F 382 explains the idiom as "slaughter gently," from the verb ḍaḥḥā,
meaning to sacrifice an animal, which, when followed by "gently"
(ruwaydan), similarly denotes restraint. 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Sajdah
32:12. 4 Qurʾan, Ṣād 38:3. 5 From Kufa to Bahrain in 36/656, in the
lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn. ʿUmar ibn Abī Salamah was the Prophet's
stepson and ward, son of his wife Umm Salamah from her previous mar-
riage. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 608 Text and
Translation نّمم كّنإف يعم دهشت نأ تببحأو ماشلا لهأ ةمَ لَظ ىلإ ريسملا تدرأ
دقف .موثأم الو أستظهر به على جهاد العدوّ وإقامة عمود الدين إن شاء الله.
2.43ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى مَص ١ةّرُخ ريشَدْرَأ ىلع هلماع وهو ّينابي َ
ّشلا ةريبُه نب ةلَق ْ بلغني عنك أمر إن كنت فعلته فقد أسخطت إلٰهك وأغضبت
إمامك أنّك تقسم ف َ يء المسلمين الذي حازته رماحهم وخيولهم وأُريقت عليه
دماؤهم فيمن ٱعتامَك٢ من اًناوهّيلع كب ّندجتل ا ً ّقح كلذ ناك نئل ةمسنلا
أربو ةّبحلا قلف يذلاوف كموق بارعأ ولتخفّنّ عندي ميزانًا. فلا تستهن بحقّ ربّك
ولا تصلح دنياك بم َ حْق دينك فتكون من ءاوس ءيفلا اذه ةمسق يف نيملسملا نم
انلَ بِقو كلَ بِق نَم ّقح نإو الأ اًلامعأ نيرسخألا يردون عندي عليه ويصدرون
عنه. والسلام. 2.44ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى زياد بن أبيه وقد بلغه أنّ
معاويةكتب إليه يريد خديعته بٱستلحاقه َ ب ْرَغ ّلِفتسيو كّبـُ ل ّلزتسي كيلإ
بتكةيواعم ّنأ تفرع دقو ك فٱحذره فإنّما هو
الشيطانيأتيالمرأمنبينيديهومنخلفهوعنيمينهوعنشمالهليقتحمغفلتهوي َ ستلب ِ ب
َ ّرُخ⟩ :ش ،ن .اذك :ھ يف ةخسنو ،ي ،م١ ه⟨. أصل ھ: ⟩خُوَرّة⟨ ٢ن، ش، ونسخة في
م: كذا. أصلم: ⟩أعماك⟨.ي،ھ: ⟩ٱعتماك⟨وتبدوخطأ.أصلھ: ⟩ٱعتمدك⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 609
ity, culpability, or guilt. I intend to march against the despots of
Syria and want you beside me in the battle. You are one of those whose
support I rely on to fight the enemy and erect the pillar of religion.
We shall do so, God willing! 2.43 From a missive sent by ʿAlī to
Maṣqalah ibn Hubayrah al-Shaybānī, his governor in Ardashīr-khurrah:1
Iam informedthatyouhavedonesomething,which,if youhavedoneit,means that
you have angered your Lord and enraged your Imam. I am informed that you
distribute among your ingratiating Bedouin tribesmen the war booty won
bytheMuslims'arms,theircavalry,andtheirblood.Iswearbyhimwhosplitthe
grain and created the soul---if this is true, you will be disgraced in
my eyes and worthless in my scales! Don't make light of your obligations
to your Lord, don't
advanceyourworldlylifebyeffacingyourreligion,elseyouwillbeamongthose
wholosealltheirdeeds.Hark!AllMuslims---thosewholiveinyourjurisdiction
and those who live in mine---have equal share in the war booty. They
come to my watering hole to receive it, and leave, having drunk their
fill. Go in peace. 2.44 From ʿAlī's missive to Ziyād ibn Abīhi, when he
learned that Muʿāwiyah had writ- ten to Ziyād, enticing him to defect by
connecting Ziyād's lineage to his own:2 I have learned that Muʿāwiyah
wrote to you in an attempt to befuddle your mind and dull your blade.
Beware of him! He is Satan, approaching a man from the front and the
back, the right and the left,3 storming in wherever he finds laxity, and
plundering wherever he finds negligence. Once, during the reign of 1
Presumably sent from Kufa in or just before 38/658. The first line is
similar to §2.40, and Maṣqalah is also castigated in §1.44 (details of
event in notes there). Ardashīr-khurrah was a district in Fars. 2
Presumably from Kufa to Fars, between 38/658 and 40/661. The
correspondence between Muʿāwiyah and Ziyād likely began when Maṣqalah
defected to Muʿāwiyah in 38/658 (see Ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh, 58:269--270).
Ziyād was ʿAlī's governor in Fars who, soon after ʿAlī's death, left
ʿAlī's son Ḥasan and defected to Muʿāwiyah in 44/665. Muʿāwiyah won him
over by officially declaring that Ziyād was his own (illegitimate
half-)brother and appointing him governor in Iraq. The Nahj al-Balāghah
text---like most primary sources---calls him "Ziyād ibn Abīhi," lit.
"Ziyād,sonof hisfather"(insteadof "Ziyād,sonof ʿAbīd,"thenameof
hislegalfather)because of the uncertainty regarding his parentage;
several candidates are mentioned in the sources, including Muʿāwiyah's
father, Abū Sufyān. Ziyād's mother, Sumayyah, a slave, is characterized
as promiscuous, and---this is the incident mentioned in ʿAlī's
letter---Abū Sufyān had once boasted to ʿAlī that he, Abū Sufyān, had
"placed Ziyād inside Sumayyah's womb." Details of these events, texts of
the letters exchanged between Muʿāwiyah and Ziyād, and between ʿAlī and
Ziyād, and Ziyād's orations, in Ḥ16:179--204 (after Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Balādhurī, Wāqidī, Madāʾinī, and Ṭabarī); B 870--871; F 383--384; R
3:140--142. 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:17. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 610 Text
and Translation ةغزنو سفنلا ثيدح نم ةتْلَ ف باّطخلا نب رمع نمز يف نايفس يبأ
نم ناك دقو .هتّرِغ عَ ّفدملالغاولاكاهبقّلعتملاوثرإاهب
ّقحتسيالوبسناهبتبثيالناطيشلاتاغزننم ُ ملا طوَ ّنلاو ذبذَب. فلمّا قرأ زياد
الكتاب قال شهد بها ورب ِّ الـكعبة. ولم يزل في نفسه حتّى ٱدّعاه معاوية. قوله
عليه السلام ⟩كالواغل المدفّع⟨الواغل هو الذي يهجم على الشرب ليشرب معهم
وليس َ ق نم بكارلا لحرب طانُ ي ام وه⟨بذبذملا طونلا⟩و .اًزَجاحم اًعَ ّفدم لازي
الف مهنم عْب أو قدح أو ما أشبه ذلك فهو أبدًا يتقلقل إذا حث ّ ظهره وٱستعجل
سيره. 2.45ومنكتابلهعليهالسلامإلىعثمانبنحُنيفالأنصاري ّ
وكانعاملهعلىالبصرةوقد بلغه أنّه دُعي إلى وليمة قوم من أهلها فمضى إليهم
2.45.1أمّابعدياٱبنحنيف.فقدبلغنيأنّ رجل ً امنفتيةأهلالبصرةدعاكإلىمأدُبة
فأسرعت إليها ت ُ ستطاب لك الألوان وتنقل عليك الجِفان وما ظننت أنّك تجيب
إلى طعامقومعائلهممجفوّوغنيّهممدعوّفٱنظرإلىمات َ قضَمهمنهذاالم َ
قضَمفماٱشتبهعليك علمه فٱلفِظه وما أيقنت بطيب وجوهه فن َ ل منه. 2.45.2ألا
وإنّ لكلّ مأموم إمامًا يقتدي به ويستضيء بنور علمه ألا وإنّ إمامكم قد ٱكتفى
من دنياه بطِمْر َيه ومن طعمه بقُرصَيه ألا وإنّكم لا تقدرون على ذلك ولـكن اً
رفَو اهمئانغ نم ترخّدٱ الو اًربِ ت مكايند نم تزنك ام هللاوف داهتجٱو عروب
ينونيعأ ١.اً رمِط يبوث يلابل تددعأ الو ١م،ن،ش،ھ:كذا.وأضيفتفيش،ي:
⟩ولاحزتمنأرضهاشبرًا⟨.شروحٱنأبيالحديد والبحرانيّوبعضمخطوطاتشرحالراوندي ّ
:أضيفت⟩ولاحزتمنأرضهاشبرًاولاأخذت منهإلا
ّكقوتأتاندبرةولهيفيعينيأوهىمنعفصةمقرة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 611 ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, Abū Sufyān admitted that he had
lapsed, an immoral admission that Satan propelled from his mouth, one
which establishes neither lineage nor inheritance. Whoever relies on it
as evidence is like a gatecrasher who is thrown out, or like a cup
dangling from a saddle that is tossed hither and thither. When Ziyād
read ʿAlī's missive, he exclaimed, "By the Lord of the Kaʿbah, he has
testi- fied to it!" And this stayed with him, until, eventually,
Muʿāwiyah proclaimed him his brother. Raḍī: ʿAlī said, "like a
gatecrasher who is thrown out (ka-l-wāghil al-mudaffaʿ)": a gate-
crasher is someone who bursts in uninvited upon a group of drinkers in
order to join them,but,sinceheisnotoneof
them,heisrepulsed."Acupdanglingfromasaddlethat is tossed hither and
thither (al-nawṭal-mudhabdhab)" is a cup or a bowl or something similar
fastened to a rider's saddle, that rattles and jiggles whenever the
rider urges his mount and quickens his pace. 2.45 From ʿAlī's letter to
ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī, his governor in Basra, when he heard that
a certain group of people had invited Ibn Ḥunayf to a wedding banquet,
and he had attended:1 2.45.1 Ibn Ḥunayf, I am informed that one of
Basra's grandees invited you to a feast and you rushed to go---choice
foods were presented to you there, and
manydisheswereserved,butIwouldnothaveexpectedyoutoacceptaninvita-
tionfrompeoplewhoareharshtotheneedyandwelcomeonlytherich!Lookto the
chickpeas you crunch up, and spit out anything you have misgivings
about! Eat only what you know to be categorically clean. 2.45.2 Harken
to me! Every follower has a leader he emulates, whose knowl- edge he
seeks for illumination. Harken again! Your leader is satisfied for his
share of the world with his two shabby garments and his two pieces of
bread. And harken once more! You will not be able to do what I do---but
help me by
practicingrestraintandstrivingforgood.ByGod,Ihaveneverhoardedthegold of
yourworld,noramassedloadsof riches,norevenlaidasideanextragarment to
replace my rags! 1 Presumably from Medina to Basra at the beginning of
ʿAlī's caliphate in 36/656, before the Battle of the Camel. A Companion
of the Prophet, one of the Allies, Ibn Ḥunayf was ʿAlī's first governor
in Basra, and he was expelled by the Camel forces in the lead-up to the
battle. He fought for ʿAlī in that battle, then remained with him in
Kufa, living there until his death in Muʿāwiyah's reign. Ṣadūq (Amālī,
604) states that the letter (§2.45.4) was to Sahl (not ʿUth- mān) ibn
Ḥunayf. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 612 Text and
Translation 2.45.3بلى كانت في أيدينا ف َ دَك من كلّ ما أظلّته السماء فشحّت
عليها نفوس قوم وسخت عنها نفوس آخرين ون ِ عْمَ الح َ كَمُ الله.١ وما أصنع
بفدك وغير فدك والنفس ُ ثَدَج ٍدغ يف اه ُ ّناظَم ٌ تنقطع في ظلمته آثارها
وتغيب أخبارها وحفرة لو زِيدَفي فسحتها وأوسعتي َ َ رُ ف
ّدسوردملاورجحلااهطغضألاهرفاحاد جهاالترابالمتراكِم.وإنّماهينفسي َ لزَ ملا
بناوج ىلع تبثتو ربكألا فوخلا موي ةنمآ يتأتل ىوقتلاب اهضورأ ق ولو شئت
نكـلوّزَقلا اذه جئاسنو حْمَقلا اذه بابُ لو لسعلا اذه ىّفصُم ىلإ قيرطلا تيدتهٱل
هيهات أن يغلبني هواي ويقودني جَشَعي إلى تخـيّر الأطعمة ولعلّ بالحجاز أو
باليمامة من لا طمع له في القُرْص ولا عهد له بالشِّب َ ع أو أبيت مِبطانًا وحولي
ب ُ طون غَرثى وأكباد حَرّى أو أكون كما قال القائل٢ وَحَسْب ُ تيِبَ ت ْنَأًءاَد َك ِ
بِ ب َ طْن َ ةٍ وَحَوْل َ ـَ ل ِإ ُ ّنِحَتٌداَ بْكَأ َك ـى الْقِدّٖ 2.45.4أأقن َ ع من
نفسي بأن يقال أميرُالمؤمنين ولا أشاركهم في مكاره الدهر أو أكون أسوة لهم
في جشوبة٣ العيش فما خُلقت ليشغلني أكل الطيّبات كالبهيمة المربوطة همّها َ لَ
ع َ ت اهلغش ةلَسرُ ملا وأ اهف َ ت اهم ُ ّمق كترِش من أعلافها وتلهو عمّا يراد
بها أو أُترَك سُدًى أو أُهم َ ّ نأكو .ةهاتَ ملا قيرط فستعأ وأ ةلالضلا لبح ّرُجَأ
وأ اًثباع ل ي بقائلـكم يقول إذا كان هذا قوت ٱبن أبي طالب فقد قعد به الضعف
عن قتال الأقران ومُنازلة الشجعان قَرأ ةرضخلا عئاورلاو اًدوع بلصأ ةّيّرـَ بلا
ةرجشلا ّنإو الأ ّ جلودًا والنباتات العَذيّة أقوى وُقودًا وأبطأ خمودًا. وأنا من
رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآلهكالضوء من الضوء٤ ١ش، ن، ي، ھ: كذا. م:
أضيفت ⟩رب ّ العالمين⟨. ٢البحر: الطويل. ٣ش، ن، ھ: كذا. م، ونسخة في ش:
⟩خشونة⟨. ي: معًا. ٤ش، س، ك، ومصحّحة في ق، وشروح ٱبن أبي الحديد
والبحرانيوالراوندي ّ :كذا.ل،ز،ن،م،ي،ھ،د،چ،آ،ت،وأصلق،ومصحّحةفيش: ⟩كالص
ِّنْومنالص ِّنْو⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 613
2.45.3 And yes, of all the lands under the sky, we possessed only
Fadak.1 But the hearts of one group coveted it, while the generous
hearts of another group relinquished it---and God is the best judge!Yet,
what should I do with Fadak, or with a land other than Fadak, when
tomorrow every man will make his home in the grave? In that darkness,
his features will be erased, his renown will fade. The tomb is a pit
which, no matter how wide its hollow, how capaciously dug by the
grave-digger's hands, is still crushed by stones and slabs, still sealed
with piles of earth. As for my own soul, I train it to piety, so that I
can come in full security to the day of great terror and have a firm
foothold on the slippery edge of the abyss! If I had wished, I could
have enjoyed the purest honey, the finest wheat, and lengths of woven
silk. But far be it for passion to overpower me, for gluttony to make me
partake of delicate foods, when perhaps in Yamāmah or the Ḥijāz there is
someone with no hope of finding a piece of bread, no mem- ory even of
having eaten a full meal! Far be it for me to sleep with a full belly
when I am surrounded by hungry stomachs and empty bellies! Far be it for
me to be among those of whom the poet has said:2 How sick you are! You
sleep with a full belly Surrounded by hearts yearning for a mouthful of
dry hide. 2.45.4 Should I be content to be hailed as Commander of the
Believers with- out sharing in the hardships inflicted on them by fate,
or without serving as an example for how to endure a rough life? I was
not created in order to eat sumptuous foods, like a tethered beast who
thinks only of fodder, or a pastured animal who merely looks to eat, an
animal that fills its belly with grass, while remaining blithely unaware
of what is intended for it! I was not created in order to be ignored and
unheeded and left alone to frolic, to drag along the rope of error or to
wander off into the wilderness! I can hear some of you saying that
AbūṬālib'sson'sdietof uncookedfoodhasmadehimtooweaktofighthisrivals or
challenge warriors. Hark! A tree in the wilderness is made of stronger
wood. Green shoots that are tended have soft surfaces, while plants
watered only by rain produce tougher and longer-burning kindling. I am
to God's Messenger as 1 Fadak was an estate near Khaybar, north of
Medina, which the Prophet had bequeathed to his daughter, ʿAlī's wife,
Fāṭimah. After the Prophet's death, Abū Bakr denied it to her, claim-
ing that the community are heirs to the Prophet's property. Long
discussion in Ḥ16:209--286;
B874--876.Fāṭimah'sorationinAbūBakr'scourt,arguingforherrighttoFadak,inQutbuddin,
Arabic Oration, 385--388 (text, translation, and analysis). 2 By the
pre-Islamic poet Ḥātim al-Ṭāʾī, proverbial for his generosity. B 877;
Ḥ16:288. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 614 Text and
Translation تنكمأ ولو اهنع تيّ لو امل يلاتق ىلع برعلا ترهاظت ول هللاو
.دضعلا نم عارذلاو الفُر َ ص من رقابها لسارعت إليها وسأجهد في أن أطهّر
الأرض من هذا الشخص المعكوس والجسم المركوس حتّى تخرج المدرة من بين حب ّ
الحصيد. 2.45.5إليك عنّي يا دنيا فحبلك على غاربك قد ٱنسللت ُ من مَخالبك
وأَفل َ ت كلئابح نم ُ ّ وٱجتنبتالذهابفيمَداحضك.أينالقرون١الذينغررتهمبم َ
داعبكأينالأممالذين فتنتهم بزخارفك هَاهُم رهائن القبور ومَضامين اللحود.
والله لو كنت اً بلاقو اً ّيئرم اًصخش ِ َ ملا يف مهتيقلأ ممأو ّينامألاب
مهتررغ دابع يف هللا دودح كيلع تمقأل ٢اً ّيّسِح هاوي َ لَ ّتلا ىلإ مهتملسأ
كولمو ف وأوردتهم موارد البلاء إذ لا وِردَ ولا صَدَر. هيهات من وطئ دَحْضَك زَل ِ
ق ومن ركب لُجَجك غَرِق ومن ٱزوَرّ عن حبالك وُفّق والسالم منك لا يبالي أن٣ ضاق به
مُناخه والدنيا عندهكيوم حان ٱنسلاخه. اغربي٤ عنّي فوالله هللا ةّيشمب اهيف
ينثتسأ اً نيمي هللا ميٱو ينيدوقتف كل سلسأ الو ينيّ لذتستف كل ّلِذَأ ال
لَأَرُوضَنّ نفسي رياضة َته َ ش ّ معها إلى القُرص إذا قدرت عليه مطعومًا وتقنع
بالملح مأدومًا ولأَدَعَنّ مُقلتي كعين ماء ن َ ضَب معينها مستفر َ غة دموعها.
أتمتلئ السائمة من ِ برَ تف اهبْشُع نم ةضيبرلا عبشتو كُرْبَ تف اهِيْعِر اًذإ تّرَ ق
عَجهَيف هداز نمٌّيلع لكأيو ض
عينهإذاٱقتدىبعدالسنينالمتطاوِلةبالبهيمةالهاملةوالسائمةالمرعيّة.طوبىلنفسأدّت
إلى ربّها فرضها وعَرَ كت بجنبها بؤس َ ها وهجرت في الليل غُمْضَها حتّى إذا غلب
الـكَرى عليها ٱفترشت أرضها وتوسّدت كفّها في معشر أسهر عيونهم خوف معادهم
وتجافت عن مضاجعهم جنوبهم وهَمهَمَت بذ كر ربّهم شِفاههم وتقشّعت بطول ٱستغفارهم
ذنوبهم. ١م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش، ونسخة في ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ھ: ⟩القوم⟨. ٢ن،
ش، ھ، .⟨اً ّيسنج⟩ :ھ ،ش يف ةخسنو ،ي ،م لصأ .اذك :ي ،م يف ةخسنو ٣م، ن، ھ،
ومصحّحة في ش:كذا.ي،وأصلش: ⟩إن⟨. ٤م،ن،ي،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ھ،وأصلش،ونسخة فيم:
⟩اعزبي⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 615
light issuing from light,1 as the hand at the end of the arm. By God,
even if all the Arabs came together to attack me, I would stand my
ground. If the opportu- nity to strike off their heads were presented, I
would rush forward alone. I shall do my best to cleanse the earth of
this warped hulk, this grotesque carcass.2 All dirt shall be removed
from the harvested grain. 2.45.5 Keep away from me, world, go on your
way, for I have cast your reins on your withers, evaded your claws,
escaped your snares, and sidestepped your slippery paths! Where are the
generations you enticed with your pandering, the nations you seduced
with your jewels? Here they all are, pledged to their graves, enclosed
in their tombs! By God, if you possessed a visible form, a sen- tient
body, I would flog you for the multitudes you enticed with false hopes,
for the nations you pitched into the abyss, for the kings you handed
over to destruction and swept to their ruin, to a waterhole where no one
drinks and no one leaves. Far be you from me!Whoever steps onto your
slippery trail tumbles, whoever sails your swelling waves drowns, while
whoever escapes your snares is well-directed! Those saved from your harm
care not if their beds are narrow. To them, this world is but a day, and
its end is near. Get away from me! By God, I
shallneverbesubmissiveandletyousteerme,Ishallneverbedocileandletyou
leadme!God'soath,Ishalltrainmyself todelightinapieceof bread,shouldIbe
fortunate enough to obtain it, and be content with salt as my
sauce---God will- ing, I shall do this! I shall let my eyes stream like
a gushing spring until I exhaust all my tears. Camels fill their bellies
with fodder and kneel to rest, sheep stuff their stomachs with grass and
lie down---should ʿAlī also be content to eat his provisions and sleep?
His eyes would close in prolonged torpor if---after many long years of
life---he started to emulate the grazing beasts and the cattle of the
fields! Blessed is the man who discharges his obligations toward his
Lord, who endures the rough grip of calamities on his body, who resists
closing his eyes at night in slumber, until, when sleep overpowers him,
he stretches out on the earth with his palm for a pillow. He is among a
devout group whose eyes stay awake in fear of the return to God, whose
bodies renounce their beds, whose lips whisper the name of their Lord,
and whose sins are sloughed off by long prayer. 1 Ar. ka-l-ḍawʾi mina
l-ḍawʾ. The variant reading is "as brother to brother" (ka-l-ṣinwi mina
l- ṣinw). 2 Refers to Muʿāwiyah, echoing Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:88, Mulk 67:22.
R 3:152; Ḥ16:291--292; B 878--879. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 616 Text and
Translation 2.46ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى بعض عمّاله رغثلا ١ةاهَ ل هب
ّدسأو ميثألا ةَوْخَن هب عمقأو نيدلا ةماقإ ىلع هب رهظتسأ نّمم كّنإف .دعب اّمأ
المَخوف. فٱستعن بالله على ما أهمّك وٱخل ِ ط الشدّة بضِغث من اللين وٱرف ُ ق
ما كان الرفقأرفقوٱعتزمبالشدّةحينلايغنيعنكإلّاالشدّةوٱخفِضللرعيّةجناحكوأَل ِ ن
لهم جانبك وآسِ بينهم في اللحظة والنظرة والإشارة والتحيّة حتّى لا يطمع
العظماء في حَيفك ولا يَيأس الضعفاء من عدلك. والسلام. 2.47مجلم نبٱ هبرض اّ
مل مالسلا امهيلع نيسحلاو نسحلل هل ةّيصو نمو 2.47.1أوصيكما بتقوى الله وأن
لا تبغيا الدنيا وإن بغتكما ولا تأسفا على شيء منها زُوي عيمجو امكيصوأ
.اًنوع مولظمللو اًمصخ ملاظلل انوُكو رجألل المعٱو ّقحلاب الوُ قو امكنع ولدي
وأهلي ومن بلغهكتابي بتقوى الله ونظم أمر كم وصلاح ذات بينكم فإن ّ ي سمعت
جدّ كما٢ صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله يقول ⟩صلاح ذات البين أفضل من عامّة الصلاة
والصيام⟨. َ ي الو مههاوفأ اوّبِغُ ت الف ماتيألا يفَ هللاَ هللا ضيعوا بحضرتكم.
والله الله في جيرانكم فإنّهم وصيّة نبيّكم ما زال يوصي بهم حتّى ظننّا أنّه
سيورّثهم. والله الله في القرآن لا يسبقكم بالعملبهغير
كم.واللهاللهفيالصلاةفإنّهاعَموددينكم.واللهاللهفيبيتربّكملاتُخلوهما
١م،ي،ونسخةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ:⟩أفواه⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م:⟩سمعت منرسولالله⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 617
2.46 From a letter sent by ʿAlī to one of his governors:1 You are one of
those whose support I rely on to establish our religion, break the
rebel's false pride, and protect vulnerable gaps at the frontier.2 Ask
God for help in any matter that causes you anxiety. Mix your firmness
with a hint of gentle- ness, be compassionate when compassion is called
for, and be resolutely firm when only firmness will work. Lower your
wing over your subjects in humility,3 show them your softer side, and
give equal attention to all in glance, look, ges- ture, and greeting,
such that the powerful are not emboldened to expect unfair favors and
the weak do not despair of receiving justice. Go in peace. 2.47 From
ʿAlī's testament for Ḥasan and Ḥusayn, after Ibn Muljam had struck him
the death blow:4 2.47.1 I counsel you both to remain conscious of God.
Do not seek this world even if it seeks you, do not grieve over any of
its benefits that are turned away from you. Speak the truth, strive to
earn God's reward, be an enemy of the oppressor and a friend of the
oppressed. I counsel you both, and all my chil- dren and family, as well
as all who read my testament, to be conscious of God, to cooperate in
common affairs, and to reconcile with kinsfolk. I have heard your
grandfather, Muḥammad, say, ⟨To reconcile with kin is even better than
to pray and to fast⟩.5 Fear God, fear God, in the matter of orphans! Do
not fill their mouths only every other day, do not let them be uncared
for, for as long as you live. Fear God, fear God, in the matter of your
neighbors! Your Prophet counseled you to be good to them, and he did
this so often we thought he might actually give them a share of
inheritance. Fear God, fear God, in the matter of the Qurʾan! Do not let
others precede you in following its guidance. Fear God, fear God, in the
matter of the ritual prayer! It is the foundation of your reli- 1
Excerpt from epistle sent from Kufa to Mālik al-Ashtar, then governor in
Naṣībīn, in northern Iraq, after the arbitration in 37/658; by this
letter, ʿAlī recalled Ashtar to Kufa, then sent him as governor to
Egypt, to take over from Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, and Mālik died en route.
Text and context in Thaqafī, Ghārāt, 1:257--258; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh,
5:94--96; Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 282--283. 2 Lit. "protect the uvula (lahāh)
of the frontier, \[for whose safety we\] fear." The image is of a weak
barrier (the uvula) between the enemy and the heartland (the inside of
the body, accessed through the mouth). 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Isrāʾ
17:24. 4 Kufa, 40/661. Fuller text and context in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh,
5:146--147; Abū al-Faraj, Maqātil, 51--53. 5 Hadith cited in Tirmidhī,
Sunan, §2501. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 618 Text and
Translation .هللاليبسيفمكتنسلأومكسفنأومكـلاومأبداهجلايفهللاهللاو.اورَظانُ
تملكرُ تنإهّنإفمتيقب وعليكم بالتواصل والتباذل وإيّاكم والتدابر والتقاطع. لا
تتركوا الأمر بالمعروف والنهي عن المنكر فيول ّ ى عليكم أشرار كم ثمّتدعون
فلا يستجاب لـكم. 2.47.2ثمّقال نينمؤملا ريمأ لتُ ق نولوقت اًضوَخ نيملسملا
ءامد نوضوخت مكّنَ يِفْلُأ ال بّلطملا دبع ينب اي ُ يالالأ١.نينمؤملاريمألتُ ق قتل
َ نّ بيإلّاقاتليٱنظرواإذاأنامُت ّ منضربتههذهفٱضربوه ّ نإف لجرلاب لَ ّثَ مُ ي
الو ةبرضب ةبرض ي سمعت رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله يقول ⟩إيّاكم
.⟨روقَعلا بلَكلاب ولو ةلُ ثَ ملاو 2.48ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية ِ
توُ ي روزلاو يغبلا ّنإو غانِ٢ بالمرء في دينه ودنياه ويبديان خلله عند من
يعيبه. وقد علمت َ أنّك غير مدرِك ما ق ُ ضي ف َ واته وقد رام أقوام أمرًا
بغير الحقّ فتأوّلوا على الله فأكذبهم فٱحذر يومًا يغتبط فيه من أحمد عاقبة
عمله ويندم من أمكن الشيطان من قياده فلم يجاذبه.وقددعوتناإلىحكمالقرآنولست
نآرقلاانبجأاّ نكلوانبجأكاّيإانسلوهلهأنم َ الى حكمه. .⟨نينمؤملاريمألتُ ق⟩
رّركتمل:ي،م.اذك:ھ،ن،ش١ ٢ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩يذيعان⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 619
gion. Fear God, fear God, in the matter of your Lord's House! Do not
abandon it as long as you live, for if you forsake it, you will not be
granted reprieve. Fear God, fear God, in the matter of jihad! Fight with
your wealth, your lives, and your tongues in the path of God.
Furthermore, foster bonds with family and help each other, never turn
away from each other or sever relations, and never cease to command good
or forbid evil, lest the wicked gain ascendancy. If that happens, your
prayers will no longer be answered. 2.47.2 Then he said: Sons of ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib! Let me not find you spilling the blood of Muslims,
shouting, "The Commander of the Faithful has been killed, the Commander
of the Faithful has been killed!" Listen to me! Only my killer should be
killed in retaliation for my killing. Pay further attention! If I should
die from his blow, then kill him with a single blow. Do not torture him,
for I have heard the Mes- senger say, "Never torture, not even a rabid
dog!" 2.48 From ʿAlī's letter to Muʿāwiyah:1
Treacheryandlieskillaman'sfaithandruinhisworldlyaffairs,andtheyexpose
his faults to those who know him to be shameful.You realize you will not
attain what is destined to remain unattained!2 Certain people coveted a
thing they had no right to, and they came up with false interpretations
of God's words that God then proved false.3 Beware the coming day! The
man with good deeds will rejoice, the one who surrendered his reins to
Satan will regret. You proposed that we should submit to the rule of the
Qurʾan, yet you are not a man who fol- lows the Qurʾan. It was not you I
answered, but the Qurʾan, whose judgment I agreed to follow. 1 Ṣiffīn,
37/657, after Muʿāwiyah raised pages from the Qurʾan on spears and
solicited arbitra- tion, and ʿAlī's army compelled ʿAlī to accept.
Fuller text and context in Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 489--494 (text at
493--494). Baḥrānī (B 884) places the letter following Muʿāwiyah's claim
to the caliphate after the arbitration in 37/658; in his version, the
letter would have been sent from Kufa to Damascus. 2 B 884; ʿA 695: the
line refers to Muʿāwiyah's call to avenge ʿUthmān in 35--36/656. My
reading: the line refers to Muʿāwiyah's bid for the caliphate, based on
the subsequent lines, re the pro- posal to submit to the Qurʾan's
judgment, which took place at the end of the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657.
3 "A certain group" isṬalḥah, Zubayr, and ʿĀʾishah, who fought ʿAlī in
the Battle of the Camel on the same pretext as Muʿāwiyah at Ṣiffīn,
namely, vengeance for ʿUthmān's killing. The "thing" is the caliphate,
which they coveted for themselves. The line, "came up with false
interpreta- tions (taʾawwalū) of God's word," may alternatively be read,
"swore they knew God's destiny," as per the variant reading (taʾallahū):
F 386, citing the hadith, ⟨God proves wrong those who swear they know
his judgments (yataʾallā)⟩, (Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §2.3). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 620 Text
and Translation 2.49ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى غيره١ اًصرح هل تحتف اّلإ اً
ئيش اهنم اهبحاص بصي ملو اهريغ نع ةلَغشَم ايندلا ّنإف .دعب اّمأ َ هَ لو اهيلع
جًا بها ولن يستغني صاحبها بما نال فيها عمّا لم يبلغه منها ومن وراء ذلك
فراق ما جمع ونقض ما أبرم ولو ٱعتبرت بما مضى حفظت ما بقي. والسلام.
2.50ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أمرائه على الجيوش من عبد الله عليّ أمير
المؤمنين إلى أصحاب المسالح. أمّا بعد. صُخ لوَط الو هلان ٌلضف هتّيعر ىلع
هرّيغي ال نأ يلاولا ىلع ا ً ّقح ّنإف ّ به وأن يزيده ال نأ يدنع مكـل ّنإو
الأ .هناوخإ ىلع اًفطعو هدابع نم اً ّوند همعن نم هل هللا مسق ام ا ً ّقح
مكـل رّخؤأ الو مكح يف اّلإ اًرمأ مكنود يوطأ الو برح يف اّلإ ا ً ّرس مكنود
زجتحأ عن محل ّ ه ولا أقف به دون مقطعه وأن تكونوا عندي في الحقّ سواء. فإذا
فعلت ذلك وجبت لله عليكم النعمة ولي عليكم الطاعة وأن لا تَنكُصوا عن دعوة
ولا تفرّطوا في صلاحوأنتخوضواالغمراتإلىالحقّ
فإنأنتملمتستقيمواعلىذلكلميكنأحدأهون عليّ ممّن ٱعوجّ منكم ثمّأعظم له العقوبة
ولا يجد عندي فيها رخصة فخذوا هذا من أمرائكم وأعطوهم من أنفسكم ما يصلح
الله به أمر كم. 2.51ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى عمّاله على الخراج من عبد
الله عليّ أمير المؤمنين إلى أصحاب الخراج. أمّا بعد.
١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيي،ھ: ⟩إليه⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 621
2.49 From ʿAlī's letter to someone else:1 This world distracts you from
the next. When a worldly man obtains a bit of the world, it opens the
door to further greed and craving. Never satis- fied with what he has,
he is always thinking of what he doesn't have. And the end? Separation
from all he amassed and destruction of everything he built! If you heed
lessons of the past, you will safeguard what remains. Go in peace. 2.50
From ʿAlī's letter to his military commanders:2 From God's servant,
ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, to officers in charge of the garrisons.
It befits those in authority that the honor they have received and the
favor for which they have been singled out do not change their behavior
toward their subjects. Rather, God's blessings on them should prompt
them to greater close- ness with God's servants and greater kindness
toward their brothers. Harken to my words!You can expect this from me: I
shall not keep secrets from you except in war, I shall not hide matters
from you except when I judge, I shall not delay in paying your stipends
or obstruct disbursements, and all of you shall be equal before me in
claiming your rights. If I fulfill my duty, you, in turn, are required
to do the following: Give thanks to God for his bounty, offer me full
obedience, do not hold back when called, do not shirk in doing good, and
plunge into deep and dangerous waters for the sake of truth. If you do
not remain upright, though, beware, for no one will fall more from my
regard than those who devi- ate. I shall punish them harshly and they
shall receive no leniency. Take this
promisefromme,yourCommander,andgivemeyours.If youdo,Godwillkeep your
affairs in good order. 2.51 From ʿAlī's epistle to his officers in
charge of collecting the land tax:3 From God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander
of the Faithful, to the officials in charge of collecting the land tax.
1 From Nukhaylah, just before ʿAlī set out for Syria, addressed,
according to Minqarī (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 110--111), to ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ.
Minqarī records the text and context, and ʿAmr's response, calling for
ʿAlī to step down as caliph. Addressed to Muʿāwiyah, per the variant
reading "to him again" (ilayhi) in some mss and commentaries. 2 Minqarī
(Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 107) and Ṭūsī (Amālī, 222) place this letter in Kufa or
Nukhaylah, just before setting out for Ṣiffīn, in 36/656. 3 Along with
the previous text, Minqarī (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 108) appears to place this
letter in Kufa or Nukhaylah, just before setting out for Ṣiffīn, in
36/656. "Land tax" (kharāj) is different from the alms-levy (ṣadaqāt)
mentioned in §2.25. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 622 Text and
Translation فإنّ منلميحذرماهوصائرإليهلميقدّملنفسهمايُحرزهاوٱعلمواأنّ
ماكلّفتميسيروأنّ
ثوابهكثيرولولميكنفيمانهىاللهعنهمنالبغيوالعدوانعقابيُخافلكانفيثواب ٱجتنابه
ما لا عذر في ترك طلبه فأنصفوا الناس من أنفسكم وٱصبروا لحوائجهم فإنّكم
خزّان الرعيّة ووكلاء الأمّة وسفراء الأئمّة ولا تُحشموا١ أحدًا عن حاجته ولا
تحبسوه اهيلع نولمتعي ةّباد الو فيص الو ءاتش ةوسك جارخلا يف سانلل ّنُعيبَ ت
الو هتبلط نع ولاعبدًاولات َ ضرب ُ َ مَ تالومهردناكملاًطوساًدحأ ّن الو
ٍّلصمسانلانمدحألام ّن ُ ّس نأملسملليغبنيالهّنإفمالسإلالهأىلعهبىدعُ
ياًحالسوأاًسرفاودجتنأاّلإدهاعم يدع ذلك في أيدي أعداء الإسلام فيكون شو كة
عليه. ولا تدّخروا أنفسكم نصيحة ولا الجند حسن سيرة ولا الرعيّة معونة ولا
دين الله قوّة وأَبلوا في سبيله ما ٱستوجب عليكم فإنّ الله سبحانه قد ٱصطنع
عندنا وعند كم أن نشكره بجهدنا وأن ننصره بما بلغت قوّتنا ولا قوّة إلّا
بالله.٢ 2.52ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أمراء البلاد في معنى الصلاة أمّا
بعد. فصلّوا بالناس الظهر حين تفيء الشمس مثل مَرب ِ ض العَنز وصلّوا بهم العصر
والشمس بيضاء حيّة في عُضو من النهار حين ي ُ سار فيها فرسخان وصلّوا بهم
المغرب حين يفطر الصائم ويدفع الحاجّ وصلّوا بهم العشاء حين يتوارى الشفَق إلى
ثلث الليل وصلّوا بهم الغداة والرجل يعرف وجه صاحبه وصلّوا بهم صلاة أضعفهم
ولا تكونوا فتّانين. ١م، ي، ونسخة في ھ: کذا. ن، ش، ھ، ونسخة في م:
⟩تحسموا⟨. ٢م، ي، ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ:أضيفت ⟩العليّ⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 623
Whoever fails to care about his end, fails to safeguard himself by
advanc- ing provisions for his soul. Know that your obligations are
small while their reward will be great. Even if you feared no punishment
for breaking God's prohibitions against treachery and hostility, the
reward promised for shun- ning them should leave you with no excuse.
Treat people with justice and be patient in tending to their needs. You
are the people's treasurers, the commu- nity's trustees, and the Imam's
agents. Do not come between a man and his needs, do not restrain him
from going about his business, do not force peo- ple to pay taxes by
selling their winter garments, their summer clothes, the beasts they
need for work, or their slaves, do not whip anyone for silver. Do not
seize the property of a single individual, whether Muslim, Christian, or
Jew,1 except when you find a horse or weapon that could be used to
attack the peo- ple of Islam, for a Muslim should not leave in the hands
of Islam's enemies objects they could use to strengthen their attack. Do
not hold back---give each other counsel, set an example for your troops,
help your subjects, and support God's religion. Push yourself hard in
God's way and fulfil your duties. God has blessed me with his immense
favors, and he has blessed you. We must thank him through our actions
and serve him with our full strength. All strength comes from God. 2.52
From ʿAlī's instructions to his governors regarding the ritual prayers:2
Pray the noon prayer when the sun casts a shadow equal to a squatting
goat.3 Pray the afternoon prayer while the sun burns intensely bright,
when what remains of the day is enough to travel two leagues.4 Pray the
sunset prayer when a person would break fast, and a hajj pilgrim would
make his de- scent.5 Pray the night prayer when twilight ends and
through the first third of the night. Pray the dawn prayer when a man
can see his neighbor's face. Pray the prayer that suits the weakest
among them and do not cause sedi- tion.6 1 Lit. "whether he prays the
ritual prayer \[of Islam\] (muṣallin) or is guaranteed protection by a
covenant (muʿāhid)." 2 Presumably from Kufa sometime during ʿAlī's
caliphate 35--40/656--661. Discussion on vari- ous legal opinions
regarding prayer times in Ḥ17:23--29. 3 I.e., when the sun's shadow
reaches the length of a handspan. R 3:163; 17:23. 4 Lit. two farsakhs. A
farsakh is a unit of distance between four to six miles. 5 From ʿArafāt
to Muzdalifah, per the pilgrimage rites. 6 I.e., keep it short---do not
pray long Surahs, or people will stop attending. B 888; R 3:164. Sim-
ilar to §2.53.16. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 624 Text and
Translation 2.53برطضٱنيحاهلامعأورصمىلعهللاهمحرّيعَخَ ّنلارَ
تْشَأللهبتكمالسلاهيلعهلدهعنمو أمر أميره عليها محمّد بن أبي بكر رحمه الله.
وهو أطول عهد كتبه وأجمعه للمحاسن 2.53.1بسم الله الرحمٰن الرحيم هذا ما أمر
به عبد الله عليّأمير المؤمنين مالك بن الحارث الأشتر في عهده إليه حين
ولّاهمصرجَبوةخراجهاوجهادعدوّهاوٱستصلاحأهلهاوعمارةبلادها.أمرهبتقوى الله
وإيثار طاعته وٱتّباع ما أمر به في كتابه من فرائضه وسننه التي لا يسعد أحد
إلّا بٱتّباعها ولا يشقى إلّا مع جحودها وإضاعتها وأن ينصر الله سبحانه بيده
وقلبه ولسانه فإنّه جلّ ٱسمه قد تكفّل بنصر من نصره وإعزاز من أعزّه. وأمره أن
يكسر نفسه عند سْفَ ّنلا َ ّن ِإ﴿ـف تاحمجلا دنع اهعزيو تاوهشلا .هللا﴾َمِحَر اَم
ا َ ّل ِإِءو ُ ّسلاِبٌةَرا َ ّمَأ﴿ـَ ل﴾ َ 2.53.2ثمّٱعلم يا مالك أن ّ ي قد وجّهتك
إلى بلاد قد جرت عليها دُوَل قبلك من عدل وجور وأنّ الناس ينظرون من أمورك في
مثل ما كنت تنظر فيه من أمور الولاة قبلك ويقولون فيك ما كنت تقول فيهم.
وإنّما ي ُ ستدَلّ على الصالحـين بما يُجري الله لهم على ألسنعبادهفليكنأحب ّ
الذخائرإليكذخيرةالعملالصالحفٱملكهواكوشُحّبنفسك عمّا لا يحلّ لك فإنّ الشحّ
بالنفس الإنصاف منها فيما أحبّت و كرهت. 2.53.3وأشعر قلبك الرحمة للرعيّة
والمحبّة لهم واللطف بهم ولا تكوننّ عليهم سَب ُ عًا ضاريًا تغتنم أكلهم فإنّهم
صنفان إمّا أخٌ لك في الدين وإمّا نظير لك في الخلق ي َ فرِط منهم الزلل وتعرض
لهم العلل ويؤتى على أيديهم في العمد والخطأ فأعطهم من عفوك وصفحك مثل الذي
تحب ّ أن يعطيك الله من عفوه وصفحه فإنّك فوقهم ووالي الأمر عليك فوقك والله
فوق من ولّاك وقد ٱستكفاك أمرهم وٱبتلاك بهم. لا تنصبنّ نفسك al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 625
2.53 From ʿAlī's testament for Mālik al-Ashtar al-Nakhaʿī when he
appointed him gov- ernor of Egypt and its provinces, to replace Muḥammad
ibn Abī Bakr, whose control over the region had been severely
challenged. It is ʿAlī's longest epistle and gathers within it the most
beautiful aspects of language:1 2.53.1 In the name of God, the
Compassionate, the Merciful. This is what God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander
of the Faithful, commands Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar, in the epistle
he writes appointing him governor of Egypt, with the charge to collect
its land tax, fight its enemies, reconcile its people, and make its
lands prosper: ʿAlī commands him to be conscious of God and prefer God's
obedience above all; to follow what God has commanded in his Book, both
the mandatory and the recommended acts, for only those who follow them
attain happiness and only those who deny them and squander them fall
into wretchedness; and to support God's cause with his hand, heart, and
tongue, for God has promised to support those who support him, and to
exalt those who exalt him. ʿAlī commands him to break the passions of
his sen- tient soul and to rein them in when they become restive. For
«the sentient soul commands vice unless God shows it mercy».2 2.53.2
Know, O Mālik, that I send you to a land where just and unjust rulers
have ruled before you. Its people will watch what you do, as you watched
the actions of earlier rulers, they will speak about you, as you spoke
about those rulers. The pious are recognized through what God prompts
his servants to say about them, so let praiseworthy deeds be your
dearest treasure. Control your passions and restrain yourself from all
that is illicit for you, holding yourself accountable in what you love
and in what you hate. 2.53.3
Clotheyourheartwithcompassion,love,andkindnesstowardyoursub- jects. Do
not be a ravening lion who devours their flesh.3 People are of two
kinds: they are either your brothers in faith or your peers in creation.
They make mistakes, they are exposed to temptations, and their hands do
wrong, be it deliberately or in error. Grant them your forgiveness and
pardon, just as
youwishforGodtoforgiveandpardonyou.Youareabovetheminrank,butthe one who
appointed you is above you, and God is above him. God has required 1 In
Kufa, 38/658. Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 126. See also §2.38 and §2.62. On this
oration, see Shah- Kazemi, Justice and Remembrance, 73--114; Qutbuddin,
"Just Leadership in Early Islam: The Teachings and Practice of Imam
Ali." 2 Qurʾan, Yūsuf 12:53. 3 Lit. "predatory beast (sabuʿ ḍārī),"
usually used for a lion. R 3:172. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 626 Text and
Translation لحرب الله فإنّه لا ي َ دَي ْ لك بنقمته ولا غنى بك عن عفوه
ورحمته. ولا تَندَمنّ على عفو ولات َ بْج َ ّ نإ
ّنلوقتالو.ةحودنَماهنعتدجوةردابىلإ ّنعرسُ تالوةبوقعب ّنَح رُمآر َ ّمؤمي فأُطاع
فإنّ ذلك إدغال في القلب ومَنه َ ام كل ثدحأ اذإو .رَ يِغلا نم بّرقتو نيدلل ةك
ام ىلع كنم هتردقو كقوف هللا كلم مظع ىلإ رظنٱف ةليخَم وأ ةه َ ّبُأ كناطلس
نم هيف تنأ لاتقدرعليهمننفسك.فإنّ ذلكي ُ طامِنإليكمنطِماحكويكف ّ عنكمنغَربك
ويفيء إليك بما عَزَب عنك من عقلك. إيّاك ومُساماة الله في عظمته والتشبّه به في
جبروته فإنّ الله ي ُ ذلّ كلّ جبّار ويُهين كلّ مُختال. 2.53.4أنصف الله وأنصف
الناس من نفسك ومن خاصّة أهلك ومن لك فيه هوى من رعيّتك فإنّك إلّا تفعل تظلم
ومن ظلم عباد الله كان الله خصمه دون عباده ومن خاصمه الله أدحض حجّته وكان
لله حربًا حتّى ينزع ويتوب وليس شيء أدعى إلى تغيير
نعمةاللهوتعجيلنقمتهمنإقامةعلىظلم.١وليكنأحب ّ الأمورإليكأوسطهافيالحقّ
وأعمّهافيالعدلوأجمعهالرضىالرعيّةفإنّ سخطالعامّةيُجحفبرضىالخاصّةوإنّ سخط ءاخرلا
يف ةنوؤم يلاولا ىلع لقثأ ةّيعرلا نم دحأ سيلو ةّماعلا ىضر عم رفتغُ ي ةّصاخلا
ءاطعإلا دنع اً ركش ّلقأو فاحْلإلاب لأسأو فاصنإلل هركأو ءالبلا يف هل ةنوعم
ّلقأو وأبطأ عذرًا عند المنع وأضعف صبرًا عند ملمّات الدهر من أهل الخاصّة.
وإنّما عَمود
الدينوجِماعالمسلمينوالعُدّةللأعداءالعامّةمنالأمّةفليكنصَغوُكلهموميلكمعهم.
2.53.5وليكن أبعد رعيّتك منك وأَشْنأهم عندك أَط سانلا يف ّنإف سانلا بئاعمل
مهبَ ل ْ عيوبًا الوالي أحقّ من سترها فلا تكشفنّ عمّا غاب عنك منها فإنّما عليك
تطهير ما ظهر لكواللهيحكمعلىماغابعنكفٱسترالعورةماٱستطعتيستراللهمنكماتحب ّ
ستره من رعيّتك. أطلق عن الناس عقدةكلّ حقد وٱقطع عنك سبب كلّ وِتر وت َ غاب َ
عن كلّ ما لا يصحّ لك ولا تعجلنّ إلى تصديق ساعٍ فإنّ الساعي غاش ّ وإن تشبّه
١ن،ش،مي،ومصحّحةفيي،ھ:كذا.أصلي،ھ،وفيهامشم:أضيفت ⟩فإنّ اللهسميع
دعوةالمظلومينوهوللظالمينبالمرصاد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 627
you to tend to their needs and tested you through them. Do not set
yourself up to be at war with God, for your hands do not have the
strength to repulse his punishment, while you have utter need of his
forgiveness and compassion. Never regret having pardoned, never rejoice
in punishing, and never hasten to act in a fit of passion when you can
find a calmer way. Never say, "I have been given command---I command,
and I shall be obeyed," for that will make hearts fester, weaken
religion, and draw calamities close. If your sovereignty makes you
haughty, then look to the greatness of God's kingdom above you, at his
power over your own life, which is far beyond anything you possess. That
will subdue your recalcitrance, restrain your sword, and bring you back
to your senses. Beware of exalting yourself in the face of God's majesty
or of imitating his power. God abases every tyrant and degrades all who
show pride. 2.53.4 Render God justice and render people justice against
yourself, your close family, and those whom you favor among your
subjects. Otherwise, you will have oppressed. Whoever oppresses God's
servants, God, not his servants, will be his adversary, and whoever has
God for adversary will find his argu- ments void. He will find himself
at war with God until he desists and repents--- nothing calls more
strongly for God's blessings to be rescinded and his punish- ment to be
hastened than persistent oppression. Let the way most dear to you be the
most moderate in truth, the most universal in justice, and the most far
reaching in achieving your subjects' satisfaction. The people's
dissatisfaction washes away the satisfaction of the elite, while the
elites' dissatisfaction is not significant when the people are
satisfied. In fact, there are none among a ruler's subjects more
burdensome in times of ease, less helpful in times of trial, more
opposed to equity, more importunate in demands, less grateful for gifts,
more petulant when denied, and less patient in the face of calamities
than the elite. The support of religion, the majority of Muslims, and
the armies with which to combat enemies come from the common people of
the community. Let your attention be focused on them, let your
inclination be toward them. 2.53.5 Loathe and distance those who persist
in exposing other people's shame. Everyone possesses faults, and it
behooves the ruler, more than any other, to conceal them. Do not seek to
unearth a shame that is hidden from you, for your charge is to cleanse
what is exposed---it is for God to judge the hidden. Conceal people's
shame as much as you are able, and God will conceal the things you wish
to conceal about yourself from your subjects. Unbind the people from
knots of rancor and sever yourself from ropes of vengeance. Close your
eyes against things you should not inspect. Do not be hasty to uphold a
slanderer, for theslanderer deceives,evenwhen hecomes inthe guiseof
awell- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 628 Text and
Translation بالناصحـين.ولاتدخلنّ فيمشورتكبخيل ً
ايعدلبكعنالفضلويعدكالفقرولاجبانًا يضعّفك عن الأمور ولا حريصًا يزي ّ صرحلاو
نبـجلاو لخبلا ّنإف روجلاب هَرَ ّشلا كل ن غرائز شتّى يجمعها سوء الظنّ بالله.
شرّ وزرائك من كان للأشرار قبلك وزيرًا ومَن ش َ رِ كهم في الآثام فلا يكوننّ لك
ب ِ لثم هل نّمم فلخلا ريخ مهنم ٌدجاو تنأو ةمَ لظلا ناوخإو ةمَ ثألا ناوعأ
مهّنإف ةناط الو هملظ ىلع اً ملاظ نواعي مل نّمم ١مهرازوأو مهراصآ لثم هيلع
سيلو مهذافنو مهئارآ فخأ كئلوأ همثإ ىلع اً مثآ ّ عليك مؤونة وأحسن لك معونة
وأحنى عليك عطفًا وأقلّ ّرُ مب مهلَوْقَأ كدنع مهُرَ ثآ نكيلّمث .كتالفحو كتاولخل
ةّصاخ كئلوأ ذخّتٱف اًفل ِإ كريغل الحقّ لك وأقلّهم مساعدة فيما يكون منك ممّا
كره الله لأوليائه واقعًا ذلك من هواك حيث وقع وٱلصق بأهل الورع والصدق
ثمّرُضْهم على ألّا ي ُ طروك ولا يبجّحوك بباطل ُ تو وْهَ ّزلا ثدحت ءارطإلا ةرثك
ّنإف هلعفت مل دني من العزّة. ولا يكوننّ المحسن والمسيء عندك بمنزلة سواء
فإنّ في ذلك تزهيدًا لأهل الإحسان في الإحسان وتدريبًا لأهل .هسفن مزلَأ ام
مهنم اً ّ لك مزلأو ةءاسإلا ىلع ةءاسإلا 2.53.6وٱعلم أنّه ليس شيء بأدعى إلى
حسن ظنّ والٍ برعيّته من إحسانه إليهم يف كنم نكيلف مهلَ بِق هل سيل ام ىلع
مهاّيإ ههاركتسٱ كرتو مهنع تانوؤملا هفيفختو ذلك أمر يجتمع لك به حسن الظنّ
برعيّتك فإنّ حسن الظنّ يقطع عنك ن َ ً ليوط اً بَص ا نمل هب كّنظ ءاس نم ّقحأ
ّنإو هدنع كؤالب نسح ْنَمَ ل هب كّنظ نسح نم ّقحأ ّنإو ساء بلاؤك عنده. ولا
تنقض سنّة صالحة عمل بها صدور هذه الأمّة وٱجتمعت بها الأُلفة وصلحت عليها
الرعيّة ولا تُحدثنّ سنّة ت ُ ضرّ بشيء من ماضي تلك السنن فيكون يف ءامكحلا ةنَ
فاثُمو ءاملعلا ةسَرادُم رِثكأو .اهنم تضقن امب كيلع رزِولاو اهّنَس نمل رجألا
تثبيت ما صلح عليه أمر بلادك وإقامة ما ٱستقام به الناس قبلك.
١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م:أضيفت ⟩وآثامهم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 629
wisher. Do not appoint as counsellor a miser who will stem your
generosity, who will alarm you with the specter of poverty, or a coward
who will weaken your resolve in the face of combat, or a glutton who
will render attractive the tyrannyof
avarice.Miserliness,cowardice,andgreedarediversetemperaments united by a
common lack of trust in God. The worst people you could choose to serve
as your viziers are those who served as viziers for evil rulers before
you, who were their partners in crime. Do not include them among your
courtiers, for they are supporters of criminals and brothers to tyrants.
You will find excellent choices among similarly astute
andequallyeffectivemenwhoarenotencumberedbywickednessandsin,who have
never supported a tyrant in his tyranny or a criminal in his crime. They
will be a lighter burden and a firmer support. They will be more
inclined to feel affection for you and less inclined to feel esteem for
another.Take them as your confidantes, keep them by your side in private
assemblies and public gather- ings. Favor above all the one who most
often tells you bitter truths, who least often supports actions that God
dislikes---especially from his chosen ones---
andwhodoessowithoutpanderingtoyourwishes.Embracepeopleof restraint and
truth. Train them never to flatter, never to lavish upon you undue
praise. Too much praise generates vanity and propels the praised one
toward pride. Do not give the good and the evil equal consequence. That
would discourage the good from doing good and encourage the evil to do
evil. Keep each person in the position that befits him. 2.53.6 Know that
nothing helps build a stronger bond of trust between a ruler and his
subjects than when he is good to them, lightens their burdens, and does
not coerce them. You should endeavor to achieve a manner of governance
that includes trust in your subjects, for trust will terminate
longstanding apprehen- sions. It is also important to remember that the
person whom you have tested and found trustworthy is the one who most
deserves your trust. In contrast, the person whom you have tested and
found untrustworthy is the one who most deserves your mistrust. Do not
end any pious tradition enacted by leaders of this community that has
created harmony among your subjects and helped them prosper. Do not
introduce any new tradition that harms traditions of the past. If you
do, those who established the earlier traditions will be rewarded for
establishing them, and you will be punished for ending them. Devote time
to understanding this aspect---study with scholars and converse with
sages about consolidating the prosperity of your lands and perpetuating
earlier practices that ensured success for the people. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 630 Text and
Translation 2.53.7وٱعلم أنّ الرعيّة طبقات لا يصلح بعضها إلّا ببعض ولا غنى
ببعضها عن بعض. فاصنإلا لاّمع اهنمو لدعلا ةاضق اهنمو ةّصاخلاو ةّماعلا باّ تك
اهنمو هللا دونج اهنمف والرفق ومنها أهل الجزية والخراج من أهل الذمّة
ومُسلِمة الناس ومنها التجّار وأهل الصناعات ومنها الطبقة السفلى من ذوي
الحاجة والمسكنة. وكلّ قد سمّى الله سهمه ووضع على حدّه وفريضته في كتابه أو
سنّة نبيّه صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله عهدًا منه عندنا محفوظًا. فالجنود بإذن الله
حصون الرعيّة وزين الولاة وعزّ الدين وسبل الأمن وليس تقوم الرعيّة إلّا بهم.
ثمّلا قِوام للجنود إلّا بما يخرج الله لهم من الخراج الذي يقوَون به في جهاد
عدوّهم ويعتمدون عليه فيما أصلحهم ويكون من وراء حاجتهم. ثمّلا قوام
دقاعملانمنومكحُياملباّ تكلاولاّمعلاوةاضقلانمثلاثلافنصلاباّلإنيفنصلانيذٰهل
ويجمعون من المنافع ويؤتمنون عليه من خواص ّ الأمور وعوامّها. ولا قوام لهم
جميعًا إلّا بالتجّار وذوي الصناعات فيما يجتمعون عليه من مرافقهم ويقيمونه من
أسواقهم وي َ
كْفُونهممنالترفّقبأيديهمممّالايبلغهرفقغيرهم.ثمّالطبقةالسفلىمنأهلالحاجة
والمسكنةالذينيَحِقّ رِفدُهمومعونتهم.وفياللهلكلّ سعةولكلّ علىالواليحقّ بقدرما
يصلحه. 2.53.8مهلضفأو اً بيَج ١كمامإلو هلوسرلو هلل كسفن يف مهحصنأ كدونج نم
ِّلَوف ءايوقألا ىلع وبنَ يو ءافعضلاب فُؤرَ يو رذعلا ىلإ حيرتسيو بضغلا نع ئطبي
نّمم اً ملح وممّن لا يثيره العنف ولا يقعد به الضعف. ثمّٱلصق بذوي الأحساب
وأهل البيوتات الصالحة والسوابق الحسنة ثمّأهل النجدة والشجاعة والسخاء
والسماحة فإنّهم جِماعٌ من الـكرم وشُعَب من العُرْف. ثمّتفقّد من أمورهم ما يتفقّده
الوالدان من ولدهما ولا َ مَ قافتَي نّ في نفسك شيء قوّيتهم به ولا تحقرنّ لطفًا
تعاهدتهم به وإن قلّ فإنّه داعية ىلع اًلاكّتٱ مهرومأ فيطل د ُ ّقفت عدت الو كب
ّنظلا نسحو كل ةحيصنلا لذب ىلإ مهل ١م، ش، ن، ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ي، وأصل ھ:
أضيفت ⟩وأنقاهم⟨. وهامش ن: أضيفت ⟩وأطهرهم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 631 2.53.7 Know that the subject population consists of
categories of people, each category sustained by the others and in need
of the others. The categories are these: soldiers who fight in God's
cause, scribes who write for the public or for
theelite,judgeswhodispensejustice,administratorswhoworkwithequityand
compassion, members of the protected peoples and the conquered who have
converted to Islam and who pay the poll tax and land tax, merchants and
arti- sans, and the lowest category, the poor and needy. God has
prescribed a role for each, drawing boundaries through the laws mandated
in his Book and in the practice of his Prophet. This is a covenant from
him, one that we preserve. Soldiers serve with God's permission as a
fortress for the public, the ornament of the realm, the might of
religion, and the path to security---the public can be sustained only
through them. Soldiers, in turn, are sustained by the land tax that God
has ordained to be used for their maintenance, through which they gain
the strength to fight their enemy, and upon which they depend to improve
their living conditions and fulfill their basic needs. These two groups
are sus- tained by the third---judges, tax collectors, and
administrators, who draw up careful contracts, collect taxes, and are
entrusted with affairs of private and public utility. All these groups
are sustained by the merchants and artisans who gather together the
stuff of life, set up markets, and suffice the other groups in their
daily needs with services that no one else can perform. Then comes the
lowest category, the poor and needy, who merit help and aid. God's grace
encompasses all. Each group has rights that the governor should uphold
to the best of his ability. 2.53.8 Place in charge of your soldiers the
man who, in the service of God, his Messenger, and your Imam, has kept
his pockets clean,1 who is the most for- bearing, a man who is slow to
anger, happy to pardon, compassionate with the weak, and harsh with the
mighty, who is neither quick to violence nor restrained by weakness.
Select for leadership people of noble lineage who belong to virtuous
families and have performed many good deeds.2 Look for people of valor,
courage, generosity, and benevolence, for they are storehouses of
nobility and wellsprings of honor. Afterward, keep an eye on their
affairs as parents keep an eye on their children. Do not consider
excessive the benefits you bestow on them in order to strengthen them.
Do not consider trivial the little kindnesses you have habituated them
to. All this motivates them to wish 1 Lit. "who is the sincerest of
pocket" (anṣaḥahum ... jayban), where "sincere" refers to "clean,"
meaning trustworthy and not corrupt. R 3:172; B 898. 2
Lit."makeclingto"(alṣiq),i.e.,"make"theleadershipof
thearmy"clingto"peoplewhopossess these attributes. B 900; H 17:53; R
3:180--181. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 632 Text and
Translation جسيمهافإنّ
لليسيرمنلطفكموضعًاينتفعونبهوللجسيمموقعًالايستغنونعنهوليكن آثر رؤوس جندك
عندك مَن واساهم في معونته وأفضلَ عليهم من جِدَته بما ي َ سَعهم .ّودعلا داهج يف
اًدحاو اً ّمه مهّمه نوكي ىّتح مهيلهأ فولُخ نِم مهءارو نَم عسيو فإنّ عطفك عليهم
يعطف قلوبهم عليك ولا تصحّ نصيحتهم إلّا بحيطتهم على ولاة أمورهم وقل ّ ة
ٱستثقال دُوَلهم وترك ٱستبطاء ٱنقطاع مدّتهم فٱفسح في آمالهم وواصل من حسن
الثناء عليهم وتعديد ما أبلى ذوو البلاء منهم فإنّ كثرة الذ كر لحسن ف َ
عَالهم يهزّ الشجاع ويحرّض الناكل إن شاء الله ثمّٱعرف لكلّ ٱمرئ منهم ما أبلى
ولا تضمّن١ بلاء ٱمرئ إلى غيره ولا ت ُ قصرنّ به دون غاية بلائه ولا ي َ
دعُوَنّك شرف ٱمرئ إلى أن تعظّم من بلائه ما كان صغيرًا ولا ضعة ٱمرئ إلى أن
تستصغر من بلائه ما كان عظيمًا. وٱردد إلى الله ورسوله ما يظلعك٢ من الخطوب
ويشتبه عليك من الأمور فقد قال سبحانه لقوم أحب يِلوُأَو َلوُسَ ّرلا اوُعيِطَأَوَ
هّٰللا اوُعيِطَأ اوُ نَمآ َنيذلا اَ ه ُ ّيَأ اَي﴿ مهداشرإ ّ َ ش يِفْمُتْعَزاَنَت نِإَ ف
ْمُكنِمِرْمَأْلا ُ رَ فٍءْي َ ل ِإُهو ُ ّد مكحمب ذخألا هللا ىلإ ّدرلاف .﴾ِلوُسَ
ّرلاَوِهّٰللا ى كتابه والردّ إلى الرسول الأخذ بسنّته الجامعة غير المفرّقة.
2.53.9ثمّٱختر للحكم بين الناس أفضل رعيّتك في نفسك ممّن لا تضيق به الأمور
ولا ّ لزلا يف ىدامتي الو موصخلا هكَحْمَ ت ة ولا يَحصُر من الفَيء إلى الحقّ إذا
عرفه ولا تشرف نفسه على طمع ولا يكتفي بأدنى فهم دون أقصاه أوقفهم في
الشبهات وآخذهم بالحجج
وأقلّهمتبرّمًابمراجعةالخصموأصبرهمعلىتكشّفالأموروأصرمهمعندإيضاحالحكم َ ت
رِثكأّمث .ليلق كئلوأو ءارغإ هليمتسي الو ءارطإ هيهَدزَ ي ال نّمم عاهُد قضائه
وٱفسح ١م، ي، ي، ومصحّحة في ش، ونسخة في ن: كذا. أصل ش، ن: ⟩تضيفنّ ⟨. ٢ن، م،
ي، ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،وأصلھ: ⟩يضلعك⟨.ونسخةفيش: ⟩يعضلك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 633 you well and place their trust in you. Do not be remiss
in keeping an eye on their small affairs, relying solely on your
inspection of greater ones. There are places where small kindnesses
benefit, just as there are circumstances in which people cannot survive
without more substantial support. Among the officers of your troops,
give preference to those who give the troops steady assistance, and give
your troops the means to sustain themselves and the families they leave
behind. Do all this until their aspiration becomes as one---to fight the
enemy. Your kindness will attract their hearts to you. Unless they are
devoted to their commanders, unless they find their control not
burdensome and their continuing tenure acceptable, they will not be
sincere in service. Encourage their hopes, praise them profusely, and be
generous in mentioning the great services of those who have rendered
these services. God willing, your frequent praise of their deeds will
encourage the bold and inspire the timid. Recognize each man's service,
do not attribute one man's service to another, and do not fall short in
articulating the extent of his service. A man's eminence should not
prompt you to glorify his trifling service, and another's humble
position should not prompt you to belittle his great deed. Refer to God
and his Messenger the problems that make you stop in your tracks, the
matters that you find obscure. God has said to a people whom he wished
to set right, «Believers, obey God, obey the Messenger, and the people
in command among you. If you disagree over something, refer it to God
and the Messenger.»1 Referring something to God is to abide by the clear
text of his Book. Referring something to the Messenger is to abide by
his agreed upon Sunnah, keeping away from what is disputed. 2.53.9
Select the man you deem the most excellent among your subjects to judge
between the people: a man who will not be overwhelmed by lawsuits or
angeredbylitigants,who,uponrecognizingthetruth,willnotpersistinerroror
hesitate to revert to what is right, whose heart is not drawn to greed,
who is not satisfied with superficial understanding but goes the full
course, the most cau- tious when encountering points of doubt, the one
who puts the most emphasis
onevidence,theonewhoisleastweariedbyhavingtoquestionlitigants,whois the
most patient in probing truths, and the most decisive in determining
when the truth has become clear, the one who does not strut when he is
praised, and is not seduced by temptations. Such men are rare. Once you
have appointed a judge, moreover, exercise vigilance in checking his
judgments. Pay him gener- ously to remove his wants and to reduce his
need to appeal to others. Give him 1 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:59. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 634 Text and
Translation له في البذل ما يزيح علّته وتقلّ معه حاجته إلى الناس وأعطه من
المنزلة لديك ما لا يطمع فيه غيره من خاصّتك ليأمن بذلك ٱغتيال الرجال له
عندك. فٱنظر في ذلك هب بلطتو ىوهلاب هيف لمعي رارشألا يديأ يف اًريسأ ناك دق
نيدلا اذه ّنإف اًغيلب اً رظن الدنيا. 2.53.10عامِج امهّنإف ةرَ ثَأو ةاباحُم مهِّلوُ
ت الو اًرابتخٱ مهلمعتسٱف كلاّمع رومأ يف رظنٱّمث ةحلاصلا تاتويبلا لهأ نم
ءايحلاو ةبرجتلا لهأ مهنم ّخَوَ تو .ةنايخلاو روجلا بَعُش نم ١اً فارسإعماطملايف
ّلقأواًضارعأّحصأواً قالخأمركأمهّنإفةمّدقتملامالسإلايفمَدَقلاو حالصتسٱ ىلع مهل
ةّوق كلذ ّنإف قازرألا مهيلع غبسأّمث .اً رظن رومألا بقاوع يف غلبأو
.كتنامأاومَ لَ ثوأكرمأاوفلاخنإمهيلعةّجحومهيديأتحتاملوانتنعمهلىنغومهسفنأ
ثمّتفقّد أعمالهم وٱبعث العيون من أهل الصدق والوفاء عليهم فإنّ تعاهدك في
السرّ لأمورهم حَدوة لهم على ٱستعمال الأمانة والرفق بالرعيّة. وتحفّظ من
الأعوان فإن أحد منهم بسط يده إلى خيانة ٱجتمعت بها عليه عندك أخبار عيونك
ٱكتفيت بذلك شاهدًا فبسطت عليه العقوبة في بدنه وأخذته بما أصاب من عمله
ثمّنصبته بمقام المذل ّ ة ووَسَمته بالخيانة وقل ّ دته عار التهمة.
2.53.11وتفقّد أمر الخراج بما يصلح أهله فإنّ في صلاحه وصلاحهم صلاحًا لمن
سواهم ولا صلاح لمن سواهم إلّا بهم لأنّ الناس كلّهم عِيال على الخراج وأهله.
وليكن نظرك في عمارة الأرض أبلغ من نظرك في ٱستجلاب الخراج لأنّ ذلك لا
يدركإلّابالعمارة.ومنطلبالخراجبغيرعمارةأخربالبلادوأهلكالعبادولميستقم أمره
إلّا قليل ً ا. فإن شكوا ثقل ً ا أو عل ّ ة أو ٱنقطاع ش ِ رب اهرمتغٱ ضرأ
ةلاحإ وأٍةَ ّ لاب وأ ٍ غرق أو أجحف بها عطش خفّفت َ عنهم ما ترجو أن يصلح به
أمرهم. ولا يثقلنّ عليك .⟨اً فارشإ⟩ :ھ،م.اذك:ي،ش،ن١ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 635 a high station by your side, such that none of your
associates dare to slander him and that he be secure against harm
threatened him by prominent men. In sum, be vigilant in your inspection
of the dispensation of justice. In recent times, our religion has become
a prisoner in the hands of the wicked, who have abused it to further
their passions, and who, through it, have sought worldly gain.1 2.53.10
Scrutinize the affairs of your administrators. Test people, then employ
them. Do not make appointments based on caprice or nepotism, for these
two attributes bring together all kinds of oppression and dishonesty.
Seek individu- als with experience and modesty from virtuous families
who have precedence in Islam, for they possess nobler character and
greater honor, are less prone to greed, and have keener anticipation of
consequences. Award them a generous livelihood, for that will strengthen
their prosperity and inhibit them from mis- appropriation. Moreover,
that can also be used to shame them if they disobey your command or
breach your trust. Exercise vigilance regarding their activi- ties and
send truthful and loyal observers to clandestinely observe what they do.
If they know you are keeping an eye on them, this will encourage them to
be honest and compassionate toward their subjects. Be watchful too with
regard to your aides. If an administrator stretches his hands toward
illicit gains, and if all your observers' reports concur, consider their
testimony enough to indict. Subject the man to corporeal punishment and
chastise him for abusing his authority. Degrade him, brand him as a
thief, and garland him with shame- ful expulsion. 2.53.11 Exercise
vigilance in the matter of the land tax and ensure that those who pay it
prosper. In its prosperity and in theirs lies the prosperity of all
other categories of people. In fact, no one prospers unless taxpayers
prosper, for everyone's prosperity depends on the land tax and on those
who pay it. Let your concern for the land to thrive be greater than your
concern for collecting abundant land tax---theland tax can be
collectedonly when the land thrives.A governor who seeks to collect the
land tax without ensuring the land's produc- tivity destroys the country
and brings death to the people; moreover, his rule will not last. If the
people complain that the tax burden is too heavy, if they complain of
blight, or lack of irrigation, or insufficient rain, or if their lands
have been inundated by floods, or ruined by drought, you should reduce
their 1 Ḥ17:60: the line about religion becoming a prisoner is a
criticism of ʿUthmān's judges and governors; in the line, certain
particles ( fa-inna ... qad kāna) grammatically denote a recent past.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 636 Text and
Translation
شيءخفّفتبهالمؤونةعنهمفإنّهذخريعودونبهعليكفيعمارةبلادكوتزيينوِلايتك امب مهتْوُ
ق لضف اًدمتعم مهيف لدعلا ةضافتسٱب كحّجبتو مهئانث نسح كبالجتسٱ عم ذَخَرَت ْ
عندهم من إجمامك لهم والثقة منهم بما عوّدتهم من عدلك عليهم في رفقك تْلَ ّوَع
اذإ ام رومألا نم ثدح امّبرف .مهب َ فيه عليهم من بعد ٱحتملوه طيّبة أنفسهم
به اهلهأزِوْعُ يامّنإواهلهأزاوعإنمضرألابارخىتؤيامّنإو.هتلّمحاملمتحمنارمُعلا
ّنإف لإشراف أنفس الولاة على الجمع وسوء ظنّهم بالبقاء وقل ّ ة ٱنتفاعهم
بالعبر. 2.53.12لخدتيتلاكلئاسرصصخٱومهريخكرومأىلع ِّلَوفكباّ تكلاحيفرظنٱّمث
فيها مكائدك وأسرارك بأجمعهم لوجود صالح الأخلاق ممّن لا تبطره الـكرامة
فيجترئ بها عليك في خلاف لك بحضرة ملأ ولا تقصّر به الغفلة عن إيراد مكاتبات
عمّالك عليك وإصدار جواباتها على الصواب عنك وفيما يأخذ لك ويعطي منك ولا
يضعّف عَقْدًا ٱعتقده لك ولا يعجز عن إطلاق ما عقد عليك ولا يجهل مبلغ قدر نفسه
في الأمور فإنّ الجاهل بقدر نفسه يكون بقدر غيره أجهل. ثمّلا يكن ٱختيارك
إيّاهم على فِراستك وٱستنامتك وحسن الظنّ منك فإنّ الرجال يتعرّفون لفراسات
الولاة بتصنّعهموحسنخدمتهمليسوراءذلكمنالنصيحةوالأمانةشيءولـكنٱختبرهم
ّنإفاًهجوةنامألابمهفرعأواًرَ ثأةّماعلايفناكمهنسحألدمعٱفكلبقنيـحلاصللاوُ لَوامب
ذلكدليل على نصيحتك لله ولمن وَليتأمره. وٱجعل لرأس كلّ أمر منأمورك رأسًا َ
تف بيع نم كباّ تك يف ناك امهمو .اهريثكهيلع تّتشتي الو اهريبكهرهقي ال مهنم
تيَ باغ َ عنه أُلزِمت َ ه. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 637
tax burden and improve their living conditions. Do not let the fact that
you had to reduce taxes weigh you down---think of the lost monies as a
loan that the farmers will repay manifold by cultivating your lands and
enriching your gov- ernorate. Besides, you will earn their heartfelt
praise and gain great joy yourself when you give them this full measure
of justice.You will ensure enough rations for them by providing this
relief, while gaining their trust by orienting them to your fairness and
compassion. You may need to enlist their support later, and if that
happens, they will willingly shoulder the weight---prosperity has the
strength to carry whatever burden you load on its back. Conversely, the
land is ruined when farmers become destitute, and farmers become
destitute when
taxcollectorsbecomeobsessedwithcollection---thishappenswhentaxcollec-
tors think they will live forever,1 and do not learn from the exemplary
lessons of past peoples. 2.53.12 Next: Inspect the abilities of your
scribes and put the best of them in charge of your chancery. Entrust the
writing of top-secret epistles in which you outline strategies and
transcribe confidential information to the scribe who
possessesthebestcharacter---chooseonewhomeminencedoesnotembolden to
oppose you in public, and whom negligence does not hinder from present-
ing to you administrative reports,or issuing appropriateresponses,or
receiving and disbursing funds on your behalf; choose one who does not
undercut the agreements he draws up for you, or fail to take down
clauses that go against you; choose one who is not ignorant of his own
worth, for such a man is even more ignorant of the worth of others. Do
not select scribes, moreover, based on casual impression, blind trust,
or plain faith. Men deliberately give a certain impressionof
themselvestorulersbycunningandbyingratiatingbehaviorthat is not always
supported by sincerity or honesty. Instead, examine the work they have
done for virtuous rulers before you, and single out the scribe who has
the best reputation among the common people, one whose countenance is
recog- nized by all as trustworthy. If you take this course, you will
prove your devotion to God and to the one who has appointed you to
govern. Furthermore, appoint a head scribe to lead each of your
chancery's operations, and choose someone who will not be overwhelmed by
a large project or panic when more than a few matters need attention.
Remember this: all of your scribes' faults that you ignore will be
attributed to you. 1 Lit. "have doubts about remaining" (sūʾ ẓannihim
bi-l-baqāʾ), translation based on R 3:187; Ḥ 17:73---I prefer this
reading because it leads more naturally into the next line about exem-
plary lessons, which are in these texts a reference to the death of
earlier peoples. Alternative translation, "they are afraid they will not
remain long in their posts," based on Ḥ17:73, who gives both
explanations; B 903; F 389. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 638 Text and
Translation 2.53.13ثمّ ٱستوصِ بالتجّار وذوي الصناعات وأَوْصِ بهم خيرًا المقيم
منهم والمضطرببماله والمترفّق ببدنه فإنّهم موادّالمنافع وأسباب المرافق
وجُلّابها من المباعد نوئرتـجي الو اهعضاومل سانلا مئتلي ال ثيحو كلبجو كلهسو
كرحبو كّرَ ب يف حراطملاو عليها فإنّهم سِلم ٌلا تُخاف بائقت ُ ه وصلح لا تخشى
غائلته وتفقّد أمورهم بحضرتك وفي اًراكتحٱو اًحيبق اً ّحُشو اًشحاف اًقيض مهنم
ريثك يف ّنأ كلذ عم ملعٱو .كدالب يشاوح نم عنمٱف ةالولا ىلع بيعو ةّماعلل
ةّرضم باب كلذو تاعايِبلا يف اً مّكحتو عفانملل الاحتكار فإنّ رسول الله صل ّ ى
الله عليه وآله منع منه. وليكن البيع بيعًا سَمْحًا بموازين هاّيإ كيهن دعب ةركُح
فراق نمف عاتبُ ملاو عئابلا نم نيقيرفلاب فِحجُت ال راعسأو لدع فنكّل وعاقب في
غير إسراف. 2.53.14ثمّ الله َالله َفي الطبقة السفلى من الذين لا حيلة لهم
والمساكين والمحتاجين هّقح نم كظفحتسٱ ام هلل ظفحٱو ا ً ّرتعُمو اًعناق ةقبطلا
هذه يف ّنإف ىنمزلاو ىسؤبلاو دلب ّلك يف مالسإلا يفاوص تاّلَ غ نم اًمسقو كلام
تيب نم اًمْسِق مهل لعجٱو مهيف فإنّ للأقصى منهم مثل الذي للأدنى وكلّ قد
ٱسترعيت حقّه فلا يشغلنّك عنهم ب َ طَر ٌ ُ
تالف.ّمهملاريثكـلاكماكحإلهِفاتلاعييضتبرَذعُ تالكّنإف شخِصهمّكعنهمولات ُ صَعِّر
خدّكلهموتفقّدأمورمنلايصلإليكمنهمممّنتقتحمهالعيونوتحقرهالرجالففرّغ لأولئك
ثقتك من أهل الخشية والتواضع فليرفع إليك أمورهم ثمّٱعمل فيهم بالإعذار
إلىاللهسبحانهيومتلقاهفإنّ هؤلاءمنبينالرعيّةأحوجإلىالإنصافمنغيرهموكلٌّ ال نّمم
ّنسلا يف ةّقرلا يوذو متُ يلا لهأ دّهعتو .هيلإ هّقح ةيدأت يف ىلاعت هللا ىلإ
رِذعأف al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 639
2.53.13 Next: Be good to merchants and artisans and instruct your
officers to be good to them as well, including those who reside in your
towns, those who travel to sell their wares, and those who profit by
physical labor. These work- ers increase everyone's benefits and provide
them with goods. They procure merchandise from isolated and faraway
places, from the land and the sea, from the plains and the mountains,
from places where people never gather in large numbers and locations
where others dare not go. They are peaceful folks from whom no attack is
to be feared, docile people from whom no treachery is to be expected.
Keep a watch on the prosperity of their affairs in your town as well as
in the peripheries of your land. Know also, however, that many mer-
chants can be excessively stingy and monstrously avaricious. They hoard
grain and fix prices. These things harm the common people and stain the
reputation of rulers. Forbid hoarding, for the Messenger forbade it.
Ensure that trading is peaceful, scales are balanced, and prices are set
at levels that harm neither buyer nor seller. If someone dares to hoard
after you have publicly forbidden it, make an example of him and punish
him, but here, too, not in excess. 2.53.14 Beware God's wrath, and
never, ever forsake the people of the lowest strata who have no
means---the poor, the destitute, the wretched, the suffer- ing, and the
disabled. In this category, too, are the beggar and the suppliant.1
Protect their rights for the sake of God, for he has entrusted them to
you. Set aside for them a share from the common treasury and, in every
town, a share from the produce of public lands won in battle by the
Muslim army. The indi- gent in far-off lands have the same right as
those who live near you; you are responsible for securing the rights of
all. Do not let any kind of pomp and ceremony distract you from
attending to the needy. You will not be excused for neglecting small
petitions, even if you attend assiduously to the large and important
ones. Do not repudiate your solicitude for the poor or avert your face
from them in contempt. Keep a check on the welfare of those who do not
have direct access to you, people whom eyes disdain and men scorn.
Appoint a trusted agent, a man who is godfearing and humble, to care for
their needs par- ticularly. Have him bring you their concerns and
respond to them in a manner that will earn you God's pardon on the day
you meet him. Of all your subjects, these are most in need of your
justice. Render to each of your subjects his rights in a manner that
will earn you God's pardon! Take care of the orphan and the elderly who
have no means of support and cannot advocate for themselves. 1 Reference
to Qurʾan, Ḥajj 22:36. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 640 Text and
Translation حيلةلهولايَنصِبللمسألةنفسهوذلكعلىالولاةثقيلوالحقّ
كلّهثقيلوقديخفّفهالله على أقوام طلبوا العاقبة فصبروا أنفسهم ووثقوا بصدق
موعود الله لهم. وٱجعل لذوي الحاجات منك قِسمًا ت ُ هلل هيف عضاوتتف ا ً ّماع
اًسلجم مهل سلجتو كصخش هيف مهل غِّرف الذيخلقكوتقعدعنهمجندكوأعوانكمنأحراسكوش
ُ رَطكحتّىيكلّمكمكلّمهم غير مُتعتِـع فإن ّ ي سمعت رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه
وسلّم يقول في غير موطن ⟩لن ت ُ س َ ّدق أمّةلايؤخذللضعيففيهاحقّهمنالقوي ِ
ّحَنوّيِعلاومهنمقْرُ خلالمتحٱّمث.⟨عتعتمريغ ّ عنك الضيق والأَن َ ف يبسط الله
عليك بذلك أكناف رحمته ويوجب لك ثواب طاعته .راذعإو لامجإ يف عنمٱو اً ئينه
تيطعأ ام طعأو 2.53.15ثمّأمورٌمن أمورك لا بدّ لك من مباشرتها منها إجابة
عمّالك بما ي َ كباّ تكهنع ايع ومنها إصدار حاجات الناس عند ورودها عليك ممّا
تَحر َ ج به صدور أعوانك. وأَمْضِ لكلّ يوم عمله فإنّ لكلّ يوم ما فيه.
2.53.16وٱجعل لنفسك فيما بينك وبين الله تعالى أفضل تلك المواقيت وأجزل تلك
الأقسام وإن كانت كلّها لله إذا صَل َ حت فيها النيّة وسلمت منها الرعيّة.
وليكن في خاصّة ما تخلص لله به دينك إقامة فرائضه التي هي له خاصّة فأعط الله
من بدنك في ليلك ونهارك ووَف ّ ِ ما تقرّبت به إلى الله من ذلك كامل ً صوقنم
الو موُ لثَم ريغ ا ّنإف اًعّيضم الو اً رّفنم ّننوكت الف سانلل كتالص يف تمق
اذإو .غلب ام كندب نم اًغلاب في الناس من به العل ّ ة وله الحاجة وقد سألت
رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله حين ّ لصأ فيك نميلا ىلإ ينَه َ ّجَو ي بهم
فقال ⟩صَلِّ بهم كصلاة أضعفهم وكن بالمؤمنين رحيمًا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 641 This responsibility weighs heavily on rulers, but
fulfilling rights is no doubt a weighty responsibility---God lightens
the burden for those who seek the here- after, are patient in adversity,
and trust in the truth of God's promise. Set aside a share of your time
for petitioners. Attend to them in person, without distrac- tions. Hold
public audience and humble yourself therein before your creator. Keep
your soldiers, aides, guards, and police officers at a distance, so that
peo- ple may speak to you freely without anxiously stammering. I have
heard the Messenger say on more than one occasion, ⟨A nation in which
the weak are not given justice against the strong except by anxiously
stammering will never be made holy.⟩1 Be patient with their coarse
language and faltering speech, put aside your prejudice and pride. In
return, God will spread for you the wings of his mercy, and decree for
you the reward of his obedience. Give whatever you give in a kind and
agreeable manner and refuse when you must, with sympathy and apology.
2.53.15 Next: There are certain matters to which you must attend
personally.
Replytoyouradministratorswhenyourscribescannotfindasolution.Respond
directly to petitions if your aides find them challenging. Get through
each day's work that very day---to each day its own tasks. 2.53.16
Next:Reservethebestof yourhours,thechoicestpartsof yourtime,for your
soul's communion with God. Indeed, all your hours and times are spent in
devotion to God if your intention is sincere and your subjects secure
from your harm.Themostimportantactsof
devotionyouundertakeforGod'sreligionare the mandatory acts of worship,
which are for God alone. Offer God your body's worship both night and
day. When you offer this worship---the worship that you perform to gain
nearness to God---offer it perfectly and completely, not damaged or
flawed, and push your body to its limits. When you stand to lead the
people in ritual prayer, you should neither disrespect the prayer nor
repel the people, for among them there may be some who are ill or
disabled.2 I asked the Messenger when he sent me to Yemen, "How should I
lead the prayer?" and he replied, ⟨Pray the prayer of the weakest among
them---show compassion to all believers.⟩ 1 Hadith cited in Abū Nuʿaym,
Ḥilyah, 7:315. 2 I.e., pray at moderate speed. You should neither
"disrespect (lit. 'squander') the prayer" by rushing and not performing
the prayer rites as they ought, nor "repel the people" by praying so
long that the "ill and disabled" stop coming. B 908; Ḥ17:90. Similar to
§2.52. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 642 Text and
Translation 2.53.17وأمّابعدهذافلات ُ طوِّل َ نّ ٱحتجابكعنرعيّتكفإنّ
ٱحتجابالولاةعنالرعيّة شُعبة من الضيق وقل ّ ة علم بالأمور والاحتجاب منهم
يقطع عنهم علم ما ٱحتجبوا دونه فيصغر عندهم الـكبير ويعظم الصغير ويقبح
الحسن ويحسن القبيح وي ُ شاب الحقّ بالباطل. وإنّما الوالي بشرلا يعرفما
توارىعنه الناس به من الأمور وليست على الحقّ سمات تعرف بها ضروب الصدق من
الـكذب. وإنّما أنت أحد رجلين إمّا ٱمرؤ سخت نفسك بالبذل في الحقّ ففِيم
َٱحتجابك من واجب حقّ تعطيه أو فعل كريم ت ُ سديه أو مبتل ً
ىبالمنعفماأسرعكف ّ الناسعنمسألتكإذاأيسوامنب َ ذلك.معأنّ أكثرحاجات .ةلماعم
يف فاصنإ بلط وأ ةمَ لظَم ةاكَش نم كيلع هيف ةنوؤم ال ام كيلإ سانلا
2.53.18ثمّإنّ للوالي خاصّة وبطانة فيهم ٱستئثار وتطاول وقل ّ ة إنصاف فٱحْسِم
مادّة١ أولئك بقطع أسباب تلك الأحوال ولا ت ُ قطعنّ لأحد من حاشيتك وحامّتك
قطيعة ولا يطمعنّ منك في ٱعتقاد عقدة تضرّ بمن يليها من الناس في ش ِ رب أو
عمل مشترك .ةرخآلاو ايندلا يف كيلع هبيعو كنود مهل كلذ أَ نْهَم نوكيف مهريغ
ىلع هتنوؤم نولمحي نم كلذ اًعقاو اً بستحم اًرباص كلذ يف نكو ديعبلاو بيرقلا
نم همزل نَم ّقحلا مزلأو قرابتك وخاصّتك حيث وقع وٱبتَغِ عاقبته بما يثقل عليك
منه فإنّ مَغَبّة ذلك محمودة. وإن ظنّت الرعيّة بك حَيفًا فأصحر لهم بعذرك وٱعدل
عنك ظنونهم بإصحارك فإنّ في ذلك إعذارًا تبلغ فيه حاجتك من تقويمهم على الحقّ
. 2.53.19ولا تدفعنّ صلحًا دعاك إليه عدوّك ولله فيه رضى فإنّ في الصلح دَع َ ة
لجنودك ّنإف هحلص دعب كّودع نم رذحلا ّلكَرذحلا ّنكـلو كدالبل اً نمأو كمومه
نم ةحارو ِ ه َ ّتٱو مزحلاب ذخف لّفغتيل براق امّبر ّودعلا م في ذلك حسن
الظنّ. وإن عقدت بينك وبين عدوّ لك عقدة أو ألبسته منك ذمّة فح ُ ط ْ عهدك
بالوفاء وٱرْعَ ذمّتك بالأمانة وٱجعل نفسك جُنّة دون ما أعطيت فإنّه ليس من فرائض
الله شيء الناس أشدّ ١م،ش،ي،ومصحّحةفين:كذا.أصلن: ⟩مؤونة⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 643
2.53.17 And further: Do not withdraw from your subjects for long
periods. A ruler's seclusion is a kind of constraint, and it leads to
his receiving inadequate information about his subjects' affairs.
Likewise, it cuts them off from getting correct information: they soon
begin to deem the trivial great and the great trivial, to think the ugly
beautiful and the beautiful ugly, and to mix right with wrong. A ruler
is human; he does not know what people conceal from him of their
affairs; no waymarks distinguish expressions of truth from falsehood so
as to enable easy recognition of what is right. So, you can be one of
two men: Either you can be someone who gives generously in the way of
truth---and if so, why hold back from dispensing a valid right or
carrying out an act of gen- erosity in person? Or else you are afflicted
with a stingy nature---if that, well, you will see just how soon people
stop petitioning you, when they lose hope in your charity! Besides, most
petitions do not impose a financial burden. In most cases, they consist
of complaints against unfairness or appeals for justice in a
transaction. 2.53.18 Next: A ruler has intimates and courtiers who often
misappropriate, transgress, or commit acts of injustice. Check their
rise by cutting off their access to such acts. Do not award land grants
to any of your retinue or relatives. Do not raise their hopes for an
estate, because in their exercise of ownership they might harm a
neighboring estate's water supply, or there may be common services whose
burden they pass on to others. If you award them such grants, the
benefits will be theirs and the blame will be yours, in this world and
the next. Compel all people to abide by what is right, whether they are
near to you or distant. In this, be patient and seek God's reward, no
matter how your rela- tives and intimates react. If any of this should
weigh on you, look only to the goal,foritsoutcomewillbeadmirable.If
yoursubjectsshouldsuspectyouof an injustice, be open and explain your
reasons---deflect their suspicions through your candor. If you explain
your reasons, you will attain your objective of keep- ing them on the
path of truth. 2.53.19 Never reject a peace treaty when your enemy calls
for peace, if it is a course that pleases God. A peace treaty brings
relief to your troops, release from your worries, and security for your
lands. But stay wary, utterly wary, of your enemy's treachery. He may
have drawn near only because he hopes to make you careless. Act with
prudence. Be cautious, not gullible. And if you draw up a truce with
your enemy, or if you offer him a covenant of protec- tion, then fulfill
your pledge, abide by your pact, and scrupulously protect your
agreement. There is nothing among all of God's mandated acts about which
people are more united---despite their various leanings and divided
views--- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 644 Text and
Translation عليه ٱجتماعًا مع تفريق أهوائهم وتشتيت آرائهم من تعظيم الوفاء
بالعهود وقد لزم ذلك المشركون فيما بينهم دون المسلمين لما ٱسْت َ كتّمذب
ّنردغت الف ردغلا بقاوع نم اولَ بو ولا تَخيسَنّ بعهدك ولا تَختِل َ نّ عدوّك فإنّه
لا يجـترئ على الله إلّا جاهل شقيّ وقد جعل َ نَم ىلإ نونكسي اً ميرحو هتمحرب
دابعلا نيب هاضفأ اً نمأ هتّمذو هدهع هللا عَته ويستفيضون إلى جواره فلا إدغال
ولا مُدالسة ولا خِداع فيه. ولا تعقد عقدًا تجوز فيه العلل ولا َ لِّوعُ ت دهع
هيف كمزل رمأ قيض كّنوعدي الو ةقثوتلاو ديكأتلا دعب لوقلا نحَل ىلع َ ّن الله
إلى طلب ٱنفساحه بغير الحقّ فإنّ صبرك على ضيق ترجو ٱنفراجه وفضل عاقبته خير
من غدر١ تخاف تبعته وأن تحيط بك من الله فيه طِلبة لا تستقيل فيها دنياك ولا
آخرتك. 2.53.20إيّاك والدماء وسفكها بغير حِلّها فإنّه ليس شيء أدعى لنقمة ولا
أعظم لتبعة ولا أحرى بزوال نعمة وٱنقطاع مدّة من سفك الدماء بغير حقّها والله
سبحانه مبتدئ بالحكم بين العباد فيما تسافكوا من الدماء يوم القيامة. فلا
تقوّينّ سلطانك بسفك دم حرام فإنّ ذلك ممّا ي ُ ضعفه ويوهنه بل يزيله وينقله.
ولا عذر لك عند الله ولا عندي في قتل العمد لأنّ فيه ق َ ةبوقعب كدي وأ كطوس
كيلع طرفأو أطخب تيلُ تبٱ نإو ندبلا دَو فإنّ في الوَ كزة فما فوقها مَقتلة. فلا
تطمحنّ بك نَخوة سلطانك عن أن تؤدّي إلى أولياء المقتول حقّهم. 2.53.21وإيّاك
والإعجاب بنفسك والثقة بما يعجبك منها وحب ّ الإطراء فإنّ ذلك من َ رُ ف قثوأ
ص الشيطان في نفسه ليمحق ما يكون من إحسان المحسن. وإيّاك والمنّ على
رعيّتكبإحسانكأوالتزيّدفيماكانمنفعلكأوأنتعدهمفتتبعموعودكبخلفكفإنّ َ ملا بجوي
فلُ خلاو ّقحلا رونب بهذي دّيزتلاو ناسحإلا لطبي ّنملا قت عند الله والناس َ
ت نَأِهّٰللاَدنِع اً تْقَمَرُ بَك﴿ هناحبس هللا لاق َ ت اَل اَم اوُ لوُق .﴾َنوُ لَعْف
١ن،ي،ويبدوأصلش،ونسخةفيم:كذا.وأصلم،ونسخةفيشمعكلمةمعًا: ⟩عذر⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 645
than the importance they attach to fulfilling a pledge. Not just the
Muslims, even idolaters in the past adhered to compacts they had agreed
on, because they knew the evil outcome of treachery. Never betray a
pledge of protection, never break your covenant, never defraud your
enemy. Only a wretched fool dares to transgress against God. God has
made his covenant, his pledge of pro- tection, a deed of safe conduct
that he, in his mercy, has disseminated among his servants, a haven in
whose unassailable strength they can find comfort, and within whose
protective shelter they can gather. There should be no malice, no
deceit, no treachery in the enaction of a covenant. Do not draw up an
agree- ment and then, after you have concluded and confirmed it, claim
loopholes, or rely on misinterpretations to retract. Even if you find
the confines of an affair in which God's covenant binds you
constricting, you cannot seek an unjust way out. Patience accompanied by
hope for relief and a virtuous outcome is far bet- ter than deception
accompanied by fear of the consequences, the fear of God's
all-encompassing reckoning. You will not be able to disavow that
deception in this world or the next. 2.53.20 Bewareof
spillingbloodwithoutlegalcause.NothingcallsdownGod's
punishmentmoreswiftly,orhasgraverconsequences,orcausesGod'sblessings
tobetakenawayfaster,orcutsyourallottedlifespanshorter,thanspillingblood
without legal cause. When God commences judgment among his servants on
thedayof resurrection,hewillbeginwithcasesof spilledblood.Donotattempt
to strengthen your hand by spilling forbidden blood, for it will
actually weaken and enfeeble your power, in fact, it will rout you and
end your rule.You will find no excuse before God or me for willful
killing---the punishment for that can be nothing but in-kind reprisal.
If by sorry chance you kill someone involuntarily, if your whip or hand
go too far when inflicting a punishment and cause death, the blood-wit
for a blow with the fist or anything stronger is the one mandated for
manslaughter. Do not let the might of your authority embolden you to
shirk payment to the family of the man you have accidentally killed.
2.53.21 Beware of self-importance, pomposity, and love of flattery, for
that is where Satan is most confident of his opportunity to erase the
good deeds of a virtuous man. Beware of keeping tally of the favors you
bestow on your sub- jects,1 exaggerating your deeds, or making and then
breaking a promise. Keep- ing tally nullifies favors, exaggeration
extinguishes the light of truth, and break- ing promises earns the
outrage of God and men. God has said, «God deems it a great outrage when
you say what you do not do.»2 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:264. 2
Qurʾan, Ṣaff 61:3. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 646 Text and
Translation 2.53.22اهيف ةجاج َ ّللا وأ اهناكمإ دنع اهيف طقاستلا وأ
اهناوأ لبق رومألاب ةلَجَعلاو كاّيإ إذاتنكّرتأوالوهنعنهاإذاٱستوضحتفضعكلّ
أمرموضعهوأَوْقِـعْ كلّ عملموقعه.
وإيّاكوالاستئثاربماالناسفيهإسوةوالتغابيعمّاتعنىبهممّاقدوضحللعيونفإنّهمأخوذ ِ
لمِا .مولظملل كنم فَصتنُ يو رومألا ةيطغأ كنع فشكنت ليلق اّمعو كريغل كنم ك
حَميّة أنفك وسَورة حدّك وسطوة يدك وغَرْب لسانك وٱحترس من كلّ ذلك بكف ّ
البادرةوتأخيرالسطوةحتّىيسكنغضبكفتملكالاختيارولنتُحكمذلكمننفسك حتّى تكثر
همومك بذ كر المعاد إلى ربّك. 2.53.23والواجبعليكأنتتذ
كّرمامضىلمنتقدّمكمنحكومةعادلةأوسنّةفاضلة أو أثر عن نبيّنا صل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله أو فريضة في كتاب الله فتقتدي بما شاهدت ممّا عملنا به فيها وتجتهد
لنفسك في ٱتّباع ما عهدت إليك في عهدي هذا وٱستوثقت به من الحجّة لنفسي عليك
لكيلا تكون لك عل ّ ة عند تسرّع نفسك إلى هواها.١ 2.53.24ومن هذا العهد وهو
آخره وأنا أسأل الله بسعة رحمته وعظيم قدرته على إعطاء كلّ رغبة أن يوفّقني
وإيّاك لما فيه رضاه من الإقامة على العذر الواضح إليه وإلى خلقه مع حسن
الثناء في العباد وجميل الأثر في البلاد وتمام النعمة وتضعيف الـكرامة وأن
يختم لي ولك بالسعادة والشهادة إنّا إليه راغبون. والسلام على رسول الله
كثيرًا. 2.54ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى طلحة والزبير مع عمران بن الح ُ ذو
ّيعازُ خلا نيص كر هذا الكتاب أبو جعفر الإسكافيّ في كتاب المقامات
أمّابعد.فقدعلمتماوإنكتمتماأن ّ يلمأُردالناسحتّىأرادونيولمأبايعهمحتّىبايعوني
١م، ش، ن، ھ: كذا. ي، وزيادة في م: أضيفت ⟩فلن يعصم من السوء ولايوفّق للخير
إلّا الله تبارك وتعالى وقد كان فيما عهد إليّ رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله في وصاياه تحضيضًا على
الصلاةوالزكاةوماملـكتأيمانكم.فبذلكأختملكبماعهدتولاقوّةإلّاباللهالعليّالعظيم⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 647
2.53.22 Beware of rushing into things before their time, or hesitating
at the opportune moment, of persistence in the face of ambiguity, or
weakness in fol- lowing through when the facts become clear---place each
thing in its rightful place and perform every action in its rightful
time. Beware of appropriating property to which the common people
possess an equal right, or of feigning ignorance of problems you should
handle when they are obvious and plain to see. If you transgress, what
is in your hands will be taken away and given to another. Very soon, the
veil will be removed, and those you have wronged will obtain justice.
Control your prideful passion, your violent anger, your brutal
hand,andyourcuttingtongue.Restrainthebladeanddelaythestrikeuntilyour
anger abates and you regain control and mastery of your will. Know this:
You will not master yourself until you remember that you will return to
your Lord. 2.53.23 You should study the methods of just governance used
by those who preceded you, their virtuous practices, the traditions of
our Prophet, and the mandates of God's Book. You have seen how I have
put these principles into practice---emulate me in this. Strive hard to
follow the path I have laid out for you in this testament. I trust that
I have done my duty to guide you and that your heart has now no excuse
to follow its passions. 2.53.24 From this same testament, the final
section: With full trust in God's vast mercy and his power to grant
every wish, I beseech him to direct us to do what will please him, what
he and his creatures deem good, what earns us praise among his servants
and acclaim in his lands, what completes his blessings for us and
multiplies his favors. I beseech him to end your days and mine in
happiness and martyrdom. In God we place our hopes.1 I end with abundant
greetings of peace to God's Messenger. 2.54 From ʿAlī's letter toṬalḥah
and Zubayr, sent with ʿImrān ibn al-Ḥuṣayn al-Khuzāʿī (Abū Jaʿfar
al-Iskāfī records it in his Book of Exhortations, Kitāb al-Maqāmāt):2
Although you deny this now, you know that I did not approach the people
until they approached me, you know well that I did not demand their
pledge of allegiance until they offered it to me---the two of you were
among them, among those who approached me and offered allegiance. You
also know well 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Tawbah 9:59. 2 Sent just before
the Battle of the Camel, outside Basra in 36/656. Text and context in
Ibn Aʿtham, Futūḥ, 2:465. The full title of Iskāfī's book is Kitāb
al-Maqāmāt fī tafḍīl ʿAlī (The Book of Exhortations Regarding the
Superiority of ʿAlī). The book is mentioned by Dhahabī, Siyar, 10:51,
but appears to be lost. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 648 Text and
Translation وأنّكما ممّن أرادني وبايعني وأنّ العامّة لم تبايعني لسلطان غاصب١
ولا لحرص٢ حاضر. فإن كنتما بايعتماني طائعين فٱرجعا وتوبا إلى الله من قريب
وإن كنتما بايعتماني كارهين فقد جعلتما لي عليكما السبيل بإظهاركما الطاعة
وإسراركما المعصية. ولعمري ما كنتمابأحقّ المهاجرينبالتقيّةوالـكتمان.وإنّ
دفعكماهذاالأمرقبلأنتدخلافيهكان
أوسععليكمامنخروجكمامنهبعدإقراركمابه.وقدزعمتماأن ّ يقتلتعثمانفبينيوبينكما
من تخلّف عنّي وعنكما من أهل المدينة ثمّيلزم كلّ ٱمرئ بقدر ما ٱحتمل. فٱرجعا
أيّها الشيخان عن رأيكما فإنّ الآن أعظم أمر كما العار من قبل أن يجتمع العار
والنار. والسلام. 2.55ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية أمّا بعد. فإنّ
الله سبحانه جعل الدنيا لما بعدها وٱبتلى فيها أهلها ليعلم أيّهم أحسن عمل ً
ا كب ينالتبٱ دقو .اهب ىلتبُ نل اهيف انعضُو امّنإو انرمُأ اهيف يعسلاب الو
انقلُخ ايندلل انسلو
وٱبتلاكبيفجعلأحدناحجّةعلىالآخرفعدوتعلىطلبالدنيابتأويلالقرآنفطلبتني بما لم
تَجنِ يدي ولا لساني وعَصَبْت َ ه أنت وأهل الشام بي وأَل َ ب ّ عالمكم جاهلـكم
وقائمكم قاعد كم. فٱتّق الله في نفسك ونازع الشيطان قيادك وٱصرف إلى الآخرة
وجهك فهي طريقنا وطريقك وٱحذر أن يصيبك الله بعاجل قارعة تمس ّ الأصل وتقطع
الدابر فإن ّ ي ىَ ّتَح﴿ كتحابب لازأ ال رادقألا عماوج كاّيإو ينتعمج نئل
ةرجاف ريغًةّيلأ هللاب كل ىلوأ ٰ َٰ حْلٱُرْيَخَوُهَو اَ نَ نْيَ بُ هّٰللٱَمُكْحَي كِمِين﴾.
١م،ي،ن،ش:كذا.ھ: ⟩غالب⟨. ٢م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ش،ن،وأصلھ،ونسخة فيم: ⟩لعرض⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 649
that every last one pledged without coercion or inducement. If the two
of you pledged freely, then you must return to the fold and ask God's
forgiveness, and you must do so directly. If you pledged unwillingly,
then by pretending to obey while masking your intent to disobey, you
have given me just cause to march against you. I swear by my life, you
have no special rights over the other Emi- grants that let your
concealed thoughts justify your actions. It would have been far less
grave if you had challenged my caliphate before giving the pledge, than
doing this---giving the pledge and then breaking it. As for your claim
that I killed ʿUthmān: There are men in Medina who have held back from
supporting either of us---let those neutral individuals judge the matter
between you and me, then, on the basis of their judgment, let each man
among us be charged with what he perpetrated. Turn back from this path
now, O sheikhs, while the greatest penalty you face is shame---turn back
before shame combines with flames! Go in peace. 2.55 From a letter sent
by ʿAlī to Muʿāwiyah:1 God created this world for the hereafter, and he
tests its people to ascertain who among them performs the best of deeds.
We have not been created to live in this world, we have not been
commanded to strive for this world, we have been placed in it in order
to be tested. God has tested me through you, he has
testedyouthroughme,andhehasmadeoneof usarightfulplaintiff againstthe
other. You transgress in your pursuit of this world, relying on
deliberate misin- terpretation of the Qurʾan, and hold me responsible
for something neither my hand nor my tongue has perpetrated.You and the
people of Syria wrap its mali- cious turban around my head, the learned
among you incite the ignorant,those standing incite those sitting.2 Fear
God, Muʿāwiyah, for the sake of your soul, and snatch your halter from
Satan's hands! Turn your face to the hereafter, for it is my destination
and yours. Beware, lest God strike you with a calamity that will
eradicate you and sever your line! I am more worthy than you of swearing
an honest oath: By God, if the will of the gathering fates joins us in
battle, I shall encamp in your courtyard «until God judges between
us---and he is the best of judges»!3 1 Presumably in 36/656, in the
lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn, from Kufa to Damascus (see the threat
in the last line). 2 "The learned" are Abū Hurayrah, Mughīrah ibn
al-Shuʿbah, and others among the Prophet's Companions who supported
Muʿāwiyah. "Those standing" are ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣand Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam.
The "ignorant" and "the sitting" are the common people of Syria. F 391;
ʿA 703. 3 Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:87. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 650 Text and
Translation 2.56ومن كلام وصّى به ش ُ ماشلا ىلإ هتمّدقم ىلع هلعج اّ مل يناه
نب حير اتّق الله في كلّ صباح ومساء وخَف على نفسك الدنيا الغَرور ولا تأمنها
على حال وٱعلم بحتاّممريثكنعكسفنعَدرَ تملنإكّنأ ّ
مخافةمكروههسمتبكالأهواءإلىكثيرمن .اًعماق اً مقاو ةظيفحلا دنع كتَوزَ نلو
اًعدار اًعنام كسفنل نكف ررضلا 2.57ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أهل الـكوفة
عند مسيره من المدينة إلى البصرة أمّا بعد. فإن ّ .هيلع اً ّيغبَم اّمإو اً يغاب
اّمإو اًمولظم اّمإو اً ملاظ اّمإ اذه يّيَح نع تجرخ ي وأنا أذ اً ئيسم تنك نإو
ينناعأ اً نسحم تنك نإف ّيلإ رفن اّ مل اذه يباتكهغلب نَم هللا رّك ٱستعتبني.
2.58ومن كتاب كتبه عليه السلام إلى أهل الأمصار يقتص ّ فيه ما جرى بينه
وبين أهل صفّين وكان بدء أمرنا أنّا ٱلتقينا والقوم من أهل الشام والظاهر أنّ
ربّنا واحد ونبيّنا واحد ودعوتنا في الإسلام واحدة لا نستزيدهم في الإيمان١
بالله والتصديق برسوله صل ّ ى الله ءارُ ب هنم نحنو نامثع مد نم هيف انفلتخٱ
ام اّلإ دحاو رمألا .اننوديزتسي الو هلآو هيلع فقلنا تعالوا نداوي ما لا
يدرك اليوم بإطفاء النائرة وتسكين العامّة حتّى يشتدّ الأمر ويستجمع فنقوى على
وضع الحقّ في مواضعه فقالوا بل نداويه بالمكابرة.٢ فأبوا حتّى
١ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩فيالإسلاموالإيمان⟨. ٢ن،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩بالمكاثرة⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 651
2.56 From instructions ʿAlī gave to Shurayḥibn Hānī when he appointed
him com- mander of the vanguard he sent ahead of his army to Syria:1 Be
conscious of God every morning and every night, beware the snares of
this treacherous world, don't trust her ever, at any time, and know that
if you don't restrain yourself from many of the things you love, if you
don't recognize the damage they can cause, your passions will lead you
into terrible harm. Restrain your soul and forbid it from evil. Control
your impulse to erupt when enraged and vanquish your fury. 2.57 From a
letter by ʿAlī to the people of Kufa when he marched from Medina on
Basra:2 I have marched from my hometown as either oppressor or
oppressed, either treacherous or a target of treachery. I call out in
God's name to all whom my letterreaches:Cometome!If
Iamintheright,supportme.If Iaminthewrong, berate me. 2.58 From an
epistle ʿAlī wrote to the garrison towns, narrating what had taken place
between him and those who fought against him at Ṣiffīn:3 Events began
thus: We and the Syrians faced off, both sides believing in the same
God, the same Prophet, and the same call to Islam. We were not attempt-
ing to increase their belief in God and his Messenger, and they were not
attempting to increase ours, our beliefs were already one. What we
differed on was the charge of ʿUthmān's blood, and we were innocent of
it. We said to them, "Come, let us approach this objective---which we
are not in a position to achieve today---with prudence. Let us first
extinguish these burning fires and bring calm to the community. Once we
have strengthened our control, we will have the power to disburse
justice and put things where they belong." "No!" 1 In 36/657 at the camp
at Nukhaylah, near Kufa. In Minqarī's version (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 121--122),
the remarks are addressed jointly to Shurayḥand his co-commander, Ziyād
ibn al-Naḍr. §2.11, §2.13 are from the same event. 2 In the lead-up to
the Battle of the Camel, sent from ʿAlī's camp close by, in Dhū Qār, in
36/656, with his son Ḥasan and ʿAmmār ibn Yāsir. Text and context in
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:499--500. 3 From the content, the letter appears to
have been written soon after the cessation of hostili- ties at Ṣiffīn in
37/657, before arbitration results were declared a few months later. The
main
Muslimgarrisoncities(amṣār,sing.miṣr)inʿAlī'stimewereKufaandBasrainIraq,andFusṭāṭ
in Egypt. Additional cities in Iran and Central Asia could also have
been addressed; they were set up to serve the early conquests and by his
time had become permanent and important settled towns in the region.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 652 Text and
Translation جنحتالحربور كدتووقدتنيرانهاوحَمِشتفلمّاضرّستناوإيّاهمووضعتمَخالبها
فينا وفيهم أجابوا عند ذلك إلى الذي دعوناهم إليه فأجبناهم إلى ما دعوا
وسارعناهم إلى ما طلبوا حتّى ٱستبانت عليهم الحجّة وٱنقطعت منهم المعذرة. فم
َ ن تَمّعلى ذلك منهم هبلق ىلع هللا َنار يذلا سكارلا وهف ىدامتو َ ّجَل نمو
ةكـلهلا نم هللا هذقنأ يذلا وهف وصارت دائرة السوء على رأسه. 2.59ومن كتاب
له عليه السلام إلى الأسوَد بن ق ُ طبة صاحب جند حُلوان أمّا بعد. فإنّ الوالي
إذا ٱختلف هواه منعه ذلك كثيرًا من العدل فليكن أمر الناس هلاثمأ رِكنُ ت ام
بنتجٱف لدعلا نم ضوع روجلا يف سيل هّنإف ءاوس ّقحلا يف كدنع راد ايندلا ّنأ
ملعٱو .هباقع اً فّوختمو هباوث اً يجار كيلع هللا ضرتفٱ اميف كسفن لذتبٱو
بليّةلمي َ فر ُ غصاحبهاقط ُ تَغرَ فتناكاّلإةعاساهيف ّ
هعليهحسرةيومالقيامةوأنّهلنيغنيك عنالحقّ شيءأبدًاومنالحقّ
عليكحفظنفسكوالاحتسابعلىالرعيّةبجهدكفإنّ الذي يصل إليك من ذلك أفضل من الذي
يصل بك. والسلام. 2.60ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى العمّال الذين يطأ عمل َ
هم الجيش al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 653
they replied, "we shall decide it through combat!" and they refused to
budge from this entrenched position, until war spread her wings and
settled upon her brood, until her flames crackled and burned hot. When
she had chewed both sides with her maw, when she had pierced both sides
with her claws, then they came soliciting the course we had proposed
earlier. We were nonetheless swift to respond and agreed to their
proposal, in a way that made the rightfulness of our claim clear and
left them bereft of excuse. God will save all who abide by this
realization from perdition, but all who persevere in their wrongdoing
will be driven back---God will corrode their hearts, and the wheel of
evil fortune will descend on their heads.1 2.59 From ʿAlī's letter to
al-Aswad ibn Quṭbah, commander of the garrison of Ḥul- wān:2 A ruler's
passions, if they lean in one direction, prevent him from dispensing
justice. Let the rights of all people be equal in your eyes, for
injustice is never defensible. Stay away from actions you would find
deplorable if directed at you.
HopeforGod'srewardandfearhispunishment,andexertyourself toundertake his
charge. Know that this world is a domain of trial---no man wastes an
hour of his time here without regretting it on the day of resurrection.
Remember: Nothing can release you from the obligation to do what is
right, especially the charge to protect your soul, and to safeguard your
subjects to the best of your ability. If you do, the benefit that will
come to you is greater than the benefit that will come to them through
you. 2.60 From ʿAlī's epistle to administrators whose lands his army
would march through:3 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:88, Muṭaffifūn
83:14, Fatḥ48:6. 2 This letter could date from any time in ʿAlī's
caliphate, 35--40/656--661, after his arrival in Kufa. The identity of
the addressee, named here as al-Aswad ibn Quṭbah, is also uncer- tain.
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ17:145) says he was not able to ascertain a genealogy
for him, and conjectures that the name may be a mistranscription for
al-Aswad ibn Zayd ibn Quṭbah ibn Ghanam al-Anṣārī, from the ʿAdī tribe.
Minqarī (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 106) names the recip- ient of this letter as
al-Aswad ibn Quṭnah. Ibn Mākūlā (Ikmāl, 7:283), without any refer- ence
to ʿAlī or this letter, mentions a man named Abū Mufazziz al-Aswad ibn
Quṭbah, who took part in the conquest of Iraq; Ḥulwān is located today
in the Kermanshah province of Iran. 3 Presumably from the camp at
Nukhaylah, outside Kufa, on the way to Ṣiffīn in 36/657. Min- qarī's
version (Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 125) is transcribed by ʿAlī's scribe, Abū
Tharwān. "Tax collectors," in the first line, lit., "collectors of the
land tax (kharāj)." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 654 Text and
Translation من عبد الله عليّأمير المؤمنين إلى من مرّ به الجيش من جُباة
الخراج وعمّال البلاد. أمّا بعد. فإن ّ ي قد سيّرت جنودًا هي مارّة بكم إن شاء
الله وقد أوصيتهم بما يجب لله عليهم من كف ّ
الأذىوصرفالشذىوأناأبرأإليكموإلىذمّتكممنمَعرّةالجيشإلّامنجَوعة َ بِشىلإاً
بهذماهنعدجيالّرطضملا عه.فن َ اوّفُكومهملظنعاً ملظاً ئيشمهنملوانتنماولِّك أيدي
سفهائكم عن مُضادّتهم والتعرّض لهم فيما ٱستثنيناه منهم. وأنا بين أظهُر الجيش
فٱدفعوا إليّ مظالمكم وما عَراكم ممّا يغلبكم من أمرهم ولا تطيقون دفعه إلّا
بالله وبي أغيّره بمعونة الله إن شاء الله. 2.61ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى
كُميلبن زياد النخعيّوهو عامله على هِيت ينكر عليه تر كه ةراغلل اً بلاط ّودعلا
شيج نم هب زاتجي نم عفد أمّا بعد. فإنّ تضييع المرء ما وُل ّ كيطاعت ّنإو .رَ
ّبتُم يأرو رضاح زجعَ ل يفُك ام هفّلكتو ي الغارة على أهل ق َ ّدرَ ي الو اهعنمي
نم اهب سيل كانيّ لو يتلا كحلاسم كليطعتو ايسيقر كئايلوأ ىلع كئادعأ نم
ةراغلا دارأ نمل اًرسِج ترص دقف .عاعَش يأرَ ل اهنع شيجلا وش رساك الو ةرغُ ث
ٍّداس الو بناجلا بيهَم الو بِكْنَ ملا ديدش ريغ كة ولا مُغنٍ عن أهل مصره ولا مُجزٍ
عن أميره. 2.62اهترامإ هاّلو اّ مل هللا همحر رتشألا كلام عم رصم لهأ ىلإ
مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو 2.62.1ىضم اّملف نيلسرملا ىلع اً نميهمو نيملاعلل
اًريذن اًدّمحم ثعب هناحبس هللا ّنإف .دعب اّمأ صل ّ رطخيالويعوُريفىقلُ
يناكامهللاوفهدعبنمرمألانوملسملاعزانتهلآوهيلعهللاى ّ لص هدعب نم رمألا اذه
جعزُ ت برعلا ّنأ يلابب ى الله عليه وآله عن أهل بيته ولا أنّهم al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 655
From God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, to the tax
collectors and administrators whose lands my army will pass through. I
have dispatched troops who, God willing, will pass through your lands,
and I have instructed them to observe what they owe to God, to refrain
from caus- ing destruction or any kind of harm. I repudiate before God
and before our compact, any violations by the army except in times of
hunger when they have no other way to curb its pangs. Punish anyone who
seizes something he has no right to, but restrain too the hands of your
rash fools from obstructing the troops or challenging them when they
take what I have allowed. I am coming up right behind the army, so bring
me any complaints of unjust behavior or hardships which you are not able
to repel except through God and me. If God wills it and with his help, I
shall correct the wrong. 2.61 From ʿAlī's letter to Kumayl ibn Ziyād
al-Nakhaʿī, his governor in Hīt, rebuking him for setting out on a raid
while failing to defend his own town from enemy forces:1 A man's neglect
of what he has been charged with and his zeal in pursuing what others
were charged to do reflects palpable weakness and flawed judg- ment.
Your decision to raid Qarqīsiyā, while leaving open the stronghold you
are responsible for with no one to defend it or to repel enemy forces,
was a rash decision.You opened the gates for enemies waiting to raid
your people.2 Out in the open, no longer strong shouldered or fearsome
of mien, you were rendered powerless to repel a breach or crush an
attack, unable to defend your townsfolk or to serve me, your Commander.
2.62 From an epistle ʿAlī sent to the people of Egypt with Mālik
al-Ashtar, when he appointed him governor:3 2.62.1 God sent Muḥammad as
warner for the world and witness to the truth of the Messengers. When he
died, the Muslims quarreled over who was to succeed---by God, the
thought had never entered my heart, never crossed my mind, that the
Arabs would uproot the caliphate from Muḥammad's family, 1 From Kufa to
Hīt in 39/659, in the wake of Sufyān ibn ʿAwf's raid. Text and context
in Balād- hurī, Ansāb, 2:473--476. Hīt is a town in northern Iraq on the
Euphrates River toward Syria. 2 "You opened the gates," lit., "you
became a bridge." 3 From Kufa to Egypt in 38/658. §2.62.1 is cited by
Thaqafī (Ghārāt, 1:303--305) as part of a let- ter ʿAlī wrote to be read
out to his followers there after Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr was killed.
Related letters are §2.38 and §2.53. "So-and-So" is Abū Bakr, the first
Sunni caliph. The apos- tasy reference is to the so-called Wars of
Apostasy (ḥurūb al-riddah), where several tribes renounced Islam and/or
refused to accept Medina's overlordship, soon after Muḥammad's death.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 656 Text and
Translation مُنحّوه عنّي من بعده فما راعني إلّا ٱنثيال الناس على فلان
يبايعونه. فأمسكت يدي حتّى رأيت راجعة الناس قد رجعت عن الإسلام يدعون إلى
مَحق دين محمّد صل ّ ى الله هب ةبيصملا نوكت اًمدَه وأ اً ملَ ث هيف ىرأ نأ هلهأو
مالسإلا رصنأ مل نإ تيشخف هلآو هيلع عليّ أعظم من فوت وِلايتكم التي إنّما هي
متاع أيّام قلائل يزول منها ما كان كما يزول السراب أو كما يتقشّع السحاب
فنهضت في تلك الأحداث حتّى زاحَ الباطل وزهق َ نهنَ تو نيدلا ّنأمطٱو ه.
2.62.2ومن هذا الكتاب إن ّ ي والله لو لقيتهم واحدًا وهم طِلاع الأرض كلّها ما
باليت ُ ولا ٱستوحشت وإن ّ ي من ضلالهم الذي هم فيه والهدى الذي أنا عليه
لعلى بصيرة من نفسي ويقين من رب ّ ي وإن ّ ي إلى لقاء الله لمشتاق١ ولحسن
ثوابه لمنتظر راج ٍ ولـكنّي آسى أن يلي هذه الأمّة نيقسافلاو اًبرح نيـحلاصلاو
اًلَوَخ هدابعو اًلَوُد هللا لام اوذخّتيف اهراّ جفو اهؤاهفس ملسي مل نم مهنم ّنإو
مالسإلا يف ا ً ّدح دلُجو مارحلا مكيف برش يذلا مهنم ّنإف اًبزح حتّى رضخت له
على الإسلام الرضائخ فلولا ذلك ما أكثرت تأليبكم وتأنيبكم وجمعكم
وتحريضكمولتركتكمإذأبيتمووَنَيتم.ألاترونإلىأطرافكمقدٱنت ُ قصتوإلىأمصار كمقد
دالب ىلإو ىوزُ ت مككـلامم ىلإو تحتُ تفٱ الو مكّودع لاتق ىلإ هللا مكمحر
اورفنا ىزغُ ت مك ُ تف ضرألا ىلإ اولقاّثـَ ت قرّوا بالخ َ سف وتبوءوا بالذلّ
ويكون نصيبكم الأخس ّ . إنّ أخا الحرب الأَرِق .مالسلاو .هنع مَنُ ي مل مان نمو
ُ ١م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيشون:كذا.أصلش،ن: ⟩لمحتاج⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 657 that they would seize it from me, and I was stunned when
people rushed to So- and-So to pledge allegiance. I held back my hand, I
withheld my pledge, until I saw that large numbers had apostatized from
Islam and were calling for the eradication of Muḥammad's religion. I
feared then that if I did not show pub- lic support for Islam and its
people, I would see it breached or destroyed. That calamity would be far
greater than losing my right to rule, a rule whose wares last for a few,
short days, then cease to be, as a mirage evaporates or as clouds
disperse. I rose to confront those challenges until falsehood ceased and
disap- peared and religion became calm and still. 2.62.2 From the same
epistle: By God, if I were to face them alone while their legions filled
the length of the earth, I would still not feel uneasy or afraid. I know
that I am righteous, and my
certaintyisbequeathedbymyLord.IknowthattheystraywhileIwalkthepath of
guidance. I long to meet God, I anticipate and expect his beautiful
reward. What grieves me is the thought that this community could be
ruled by the rash
anddepravedwhotakewhatbelongstoGodastheirownproperty,treathisser- vants
like slaves, view the pious as enemies to be struck down and the wicked
as allies, whose numbers include men who drank prohibited drinks, who
were whipped under the aegis of Islam as punishment for their blatant
crime, as well as those who did not accept Islam until they were bought
for a paltry sum.1 If not, I would never go to the trouble to rouse,
reprehend, gather, or goad you, but would consign you to your refusal
and your tepid response. Do you not see that your borders shrink, your
cities are conquered, your territories are seized, and your lands are
attacked? March to fight your enemy, may God have mercy on you! Do not
sink to the earth in languor, else you acknowledge your shame and accept
dishonor, and your share will be the vilest and ugliest of all.The true
warrior is ever wakeful. If you sleep, be aware that your enemy does
not. Go in peace. 1 "Those who drank" refers to Walīd ibn ʿUqbah ibn Abī
Muʿīṭ, ʿUthmān's stepbrother and his
governorinKufa(Ḥ17:227--245---lengthynarrative,afterAbūal-Farajal-IsfahānīandIbnʿAbd
al-Barr; B 919; F 393), and/or al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah (F 393 again; R
3:226--227). "Those who did not accept Islam until they were bought" by
gifts from the Prophet after the Conquest of Mecca, refers to Muʿāwiyah
and his father, Abū Sufyān (B 919), also several members of Muʿāwiyah's
Umayyad clan (Ḥ17:226), and/or ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ(F 393; R 3:227; B 919).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 658 Text and
Translation 2.63ومنكتابلهعليهالسلامإلىأبيموسىالأشعري ّ
وهوعاملهعلىالـكوفةوقدبلغهعنه لمجلا باحصأ برحل مهبدن اّ مل هيلإ جورخلا نع
سانلا هطيبثت من عبد الله أمير المؤمنين إلى عبد الله بن قيس. أمّا بعد. فقد
بلغني عنك قول هو لك وعليك فإذا قدم عليك رسولي فٱرفع ذَيلك وٱشدد
مِئْزَرَكوٱخرجمنجُحركوٱندُبمنمعك.فإنحقّقت١فٱنفذوإنتفشّلتفٱبعدوٱيم اللهلتؤتي َ َ
لخُيىّتحكرتُ تالوتنأثيح ّن طزُبدُكبخاثركوذائب ُ لَجعُ تىّتحوكدماجبك عن قِعدتك
وتَحذَر من أمامك كحذرك من خلفك. وما هي بِاله ُ وَينا التي ترجو ولـكنّها ُ يو
اهلمج بكرُ ي ىربكـلا ةيهادلا ذَلّ صَعبها ويسهل جبلها. فٱعقل عقلك وٱملك أمرك
ُ تل ىرَ حلابف ةاجن يف الو بحُر ريغ ىلإ ّحنَ تف تهرك نإف كّظحو كبيصن ذخو
كفَينّ وأنت نائم حتّى لا يقال أين فلان والله إنّه لحقّ مع مُحِقّ وما نبالي ما
صنع الملحدون. والسلام. 2.64ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية جوابًا عن
كتاب منه ذ ام ىلع متنأو نحن اّ نك اّنإف .دعب اّمأ كرت من الأُلفة والجماعة
ففرّق بيننا وبينكم أمس فنأ ناك نأ دعبو اًهرك اّلإ مكملسم ملسأ امو متنتُ فو
انمقتسٱ اّنأ مويلاو مترفكو اّنمآ اّنأ ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ:
⟩خففت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 659
2.63 From ʿAlī's letter to Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī, his governor in Kufa.
ʿAlī had sent word to the Kufans soliciting their support against his
opponents at the Battle of the Camel, and he learned that Abū Mūsā was
actively dissuading them:1 From God's servant, Commander of the
Faithful, to ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays. I am told that you have spoken words
that go both for you and against you. When my messenger arrives, roll up
your sleeves, gird your loins, emerge from your hideout, and urge your
townspeople to fight. If you are capable, get going. If
youareacoward,standdown.ByGod,youwillbeseizedwhereveryougoand pounded
until you are creamed and crushed,2 you will be thrown from your seat,
fearing what comes at you from the front and from behind. You are not
lookingatatrivialprotestherebutatagravecalamity---itscamelstallionsmust
be ridden, its restive beasts must be tamed, its threatening heights
must be lev- elled. Return to your senses, man, regain your command, and
take your due share and portion. Or, if you find this repugnant, then
step aside and leave, tak- ing with you neither greeting nor
safe-conduct---we are better off without you! Sleep on. No one will even
ask, "Where is So-and-So?"We are righteous, by God, and on the path of
right. We care nothing for what the heretics do. Go in peace. 2.64 From
ʿAlī's reply to Muʿāwiyah:3 Yes, my clan and yours were on terms of
affection and unity, as you say, but what divided us yesterday was our
belief and your unbelief, and what divides us today is our right and
your wrong. Those of you who accepted Islam did so only because they
were forced to, after the foremost Arabians had joined God's Messenger
and formed the vanguard of Islam.4 You claim that I killed Ṭalḥah and
Zubayr, threatened ʿĀʾishah, and set up a military base between the two
1 FromhiscampinDhūQārtoKufain36/656,inthelead-uptotheBattleof
theCamel,address- ing Abū Mūsā by his given name and patronymic,
ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays. In response to ʿAlī's earlier message instructing
him to recruit, Abū Mūsā had given a speech in which, though
acknowledging ʿAlī's caliphate, he cautioned the Kufans against
answering ʿAlī's call to fight; he said he had heard the Prophet say
there would come a time when it was better to sit back than to fight,
and this was that time, because it was not permitted to Muslims to fight
their fellow Muslims. ʿAlī sent his letter with his son Ḥasan to Abū
Mūsā in Kufa. Ḥasan dismissed Abū Mūsā from his post and recruited the
Kufans to join ʿAlī. B 920; Ḥ17:246. 2 Lit. "... until your cream mixes
with your whey, your liquids with your solids." 3 Presumably sent from
Kufa to Damascus in 37/657, in the lead-up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn
(contains lines similar to §2.10). See Muʿāwiyah's letter that prompted
ʿAlī's response in Ḥ 17:251--256. 4 After having fought the Muslims in
the early years, Muʿāwiyah's father, Abū Sufyān, and most of his clan
accepted Islam only after the Conquest of Mecca, when a large part of
the Arabian Peninsula had come under Muḥammad's control. Abū Sufyān's
story in R 3:231--232; B 922. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 660 Text and
Translation الإسلام كلّه لرسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله حزبًا. وذ كرت أن
ّ ي قتلت طلحة والزبير وشرّدتبعائشةونزلتبينالم ِ صرَينوذلكأمرغِبت َ
عنهفلاعليكولاالعذرفيهإليك. وذ كرت أنّك زائري في المهاجرين والأنصار وقد
ٱنقطعت الهجرة يوم أُس ِ ر أخوك فإن ّ نإفْهِفرَ تسٱف لجع كيف ناك ي إن أزرك
فذلك جدير أن يكون الله إنّما بعثني للنقمة منك وإن تزرني فكما قال أخو بني
أسد١ مُسْت َ صلا َحاَيِر َنيِ لِبْق فْي َ ّ ِ ت َ ضْرِبُه ُ مْ ب بــِصاَ ح ِ ٍ بَيْــنَ
أَغْــوَارٍ وَجُلْم ُ ودٖ وعندي السيف الذي أعضضته بجدّك وخالك وأخيك في مقام واحد.
وإنّك والله ما علمت ُ الأغلف ُ القلب ِ المقارِب ُ العقلِ والأولى أن يقال لك
إنّك رقيت سُلّـمًا أطلعك اًرمأ تبلطو كتمئاس ريغ تْيَعَرو كتّ لاض ريغ تدشن كّنإل كل
ال كيلع ءوس علطم لست من أهله ولا في معدنه فما أبعد قولك من فعلك وقريب ٌ
ما أشبهت من أعمام وأخوالحملتهمالشقاوةوتمنّيالباطلعلىالجحودبمحمّدصل ّ
ىاللهعليهفصُرعوامصارعهم ِ شامُ ت ملو ىغولا اهنم الخ ام فويس عقوب اً ميرح
اوعنمي ملو اًميظع اوعفدي مل تملع ثيح ها ١البحر:البسيط. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 661
garrison towns.1 This was an event at which you were not present. Even
if an infraction were committed, it was not committed against you, and
you are owed no explanation.You threaten to attack me with a group of
Emigrants and Allies---in fact, Emigration ended with the battle in
which your brother was taken captive.2 Don't bother to make haste, but
get some rest---when I attack
you,itwillbeover.Godhassentmetovisithispunishmentonyou.If youattack me
now, then it will be as the Asadī tribesman has said:3 They advance into
the burning winds of high summer As they enter the lowlands, it blows
dust, and pebbles, and rocks in their faces. I have the same sword with
me now with which I severed the heads of your grandfather, your uncle,
and your brother in a single battle,4 while you, by God---for as long as
I have known you---have had a hardened heart,5 and a deficient mind.
Someone should tell you that you have climbed the ladder to a height
that showsyouan evil time ahead,which will goagainstyou,not foryou. You
seek another's camels and pasture another's goats, you pursue a thing to
which you have no right, that lies in a different quarry than yours. How
far your words from your deeds! How close your resemblance to paternal
and maternal
uncles,whowerepromptedbytheirwretchedviewsandunholydesirestochal-
lengeMuḥammad!Theywerekilledinbattle,asyouknowonlytoowell,unable to
defend themselves against the great calamity that befell them, or to
protect their sanctuary from the clash of swords. No battle is empty of
sword-thrusts, 1 The "two garrison towns" are Kufa and Basra. 2 Lit.
"You say you will visit me." The subtext is that there are no Emigrants
or Allies among Muʿāwiyah's supporters; that, in fact, Muʿāwiyah, and
his associates are all enemies of Islam. The Emigrants, mainly from
Mecca, who left their homes and emigrated with Muḥammad to Medina,
together with the Allies of Medina, are revered for their early and
sincere service to Islam. "The battle" is the Conquest of Mecca,
following which Muḥammad said that the chapter of Emigration was now
closed; "your brother" is Yazīd ibn Abī Sufyān, who was taken captive in
a skirmish just ahead of the Conquest. Ḥ17:256; F 394. A different and
more convo- luted explanation is that the "brother" is ʿAmr ibn Abī
Sufyān, who was taken captive (by ʿAlī) during the Battle of Badr
earlier, and that the "end of Emigration" is not meant literally but
denotes Muʿāwiyah's family's enmity for Islam. B 922. A variant reading
here (also B 922) is "your father"---i.e., Abū Sufyān---instead of "your
brother," and "taken captive" denotes Abū Sufyān's defeat rather than
actual capture. 3 Verse attributed to the pre-Islamic poet Bishr ibn Abī
Khāzim al-Asadī. Ḥ18:19. 4 ʿAlī killed Muʿāwiyah's maternal grandfather,
ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah, his maternal uncle Walīd ibn ʿUtbah, and his brother
Ḥanẓalah ibn Abī Sufyān at the Battle of Badr. Ḥ19:19; B 792/923; R
3:31/234; F 369/394. 5 Reference to Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:88. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 662 Text and
Translation اله ُ وَينا. وقد أكثرت في قتلة عثمان فٱدخل فيما دخل فيه الناس
ثمّحاكم القوم إليّ أحملك وإيّاهم على كتاب الله. وأمّا تلك التي تريد فإنّها
خُدعة الصبيّ عن اللبن في أوّل الفصال. والسلام لأهله. 2.65ومن كتاب له عليه
السلام إليه أيضًا جرادم تكـلس دقف رومألا نايع نم رصابلا حْمَ ّللاب عفتنت نأ
كل نآ دقف .دعب اّمأ الع دق ام كلاحتنٱبو بيذاكألاو نيَ ملا رورغ كماحقإو
ليطابألا كئاعّدٱب كفالسأ كمدو كمحل نم كل مزلأ وه امل اًدوحجو ّقحلا نم
اًرارف كنود نزُ تخٱ امل كزازتبٱو كنع َ ب اَذاَ مَ ف﴿ .كردص هب ئلُمو كعمس هاعو
دق اّمم عْدَ الْح َ َ ل َ ّضلا ا َ ّل ِإ ِّق الُ﴾وبعد البيان إلّا ١تشعأو
اهبيبالج تفدغأ املاط ةنتفلا ّنإف اهتَسبَ ل ىلع اهلامتشٱو ةهبشلا رذحٱف .سبَ
ّللا مْلِّسلا نع اهاوُ ق تفعض لوقلا نم نينافأ وذ كنم باتك يناتأ دقو .اهتملظ
راصبألا وأساطير لم يَح ُ يف طباخلاو ساه َ ّدلا يف ضئاخلاك اهنم تحبصأ .ملح
الو ملع كنم اهك ىذاحيو قونَألا اهنود رصقت مالعألا ةحزان مارَ ملا ةديعب ةبَ
قرَم ىلإ تيّقرتو ساميِّدلا بهاالعَيّوق.وحَاش َ
للهأنتليللمسلمينبعديصَدَرًاأووِردًاأوأجريلكعلىأحدمنهم عقدًا أو عهدًا فمن الآن
فتدارك نفسك وٱنظر لها فإنّك إن فرّطت حتّى ينهد إليك عباد الله أُرتجت ْ عليك
الأمور ومُنعت َ أمرًا هو منك اليوم مقبول. ١م،ن،ھ:كذا.ش: ⟩وأغشت⟨.ي:معًا.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 663
and you will not find these slow in coming! You go on and on about
ʿUthmān's killers---enter the fold that all the people have entered,
then raise to me your plaint against that group, and I shall settle the
matter between them and you according to God's Book. As for your other
demand, it is but a toy one gives to an infant to distract him from milk
while being weaned.1 Peace to those who deserve it. 2.65 From another
letter sent by ʿAlī to Muʿāwiyah:2 This is the time for you to
understand fully the affairs swiftly unfolding before your eyes and take
heed. You walked in the path of your forebears by making false
allegations, rushing headlong into the paths of deception and
dishonesty, claiming what is above your reach, and plundering what is
not meant for you. You fled from the truth and denied something that is
closer unto you than your own flesh and blood---words your own ears have
heard, and your own breast
enfolds.3«Butwhatisthereaftertruthsaveerror»,4andafterclaritysaveconfu-
sion?Bewareof suspicionandthedoubtsthatitbringsalong!Longhassedition
spread its cloak and, with its darkness, robbed eyes of sight! I have
received a strange letter from you, filled with contradictory
utterances, whose supposedly potent points are too weak to forge any
kind of peace;5 in fact, it is stuffed with nonsensical myths that you
have clearly not fashioned with any knowledge or maturity. With these
proposals, you are like a man sinking into a swamp or stumbling about in
a cavern. You attempt to climb a tower that rises beyond your reach,
that gives you no waymarks, a tower that is too high even for the
soaring kite, as lofty as twinkling Capella. God forbid that after me
you should have charge of taking the Muslims to and from their
waterhole, or that I should grant you authority now to oversee a single
contract or covenant for even one of them!6 Save your soul and look
directly to its welfare. If you continue to transgress until God's
servants attack you, all your pathways will be blocked. At that time,
you will be denied the chance to offer me what I am willing to accept
from you today. 1 Soon after the Battle of the Camel, Muʿāwiyah demanded
that ʿAlī confirm him as governor of Damascus, else he would not pledge
allegiance. ʿAlī characterizes the demand as a cheap ruse. Ḥ19:21; R
3:235; B 923. 2 Response to Muʿāwiyah's letter (not transcribed in the
commentaries) after the Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658, proposing that
ʿAlī appoint him successor, whereupon he would cease hostilities and
pledge allegiance (see also §2.73). Ḥ19:27; B 924--925. 3 Refers to the
Prophet's numerous hadiths in praise of ʿAlī, including the proclamation
at Ghadīr Khumm, which made obeying ʿAlī incumbent on Muʿāwiyah.
Ḥ19:24--25; B 925. 4 Qurʾan, Yūnus 10:32. 5 I translate silm as "peace"
(following B 924; R 3:243). If we translate silm as "being Muslim"
(following Ḥ19:25--26), the line reads: "too weak to have come from a
Muslim." 6 The translation is based on B 925; R 3:245. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 664 Text and
Translation
2.66ومنكتابلهعليهالسلامإلىعبداللهبنالعبّاسرحمهاللهوقدمضىهذاالكتابفيما
تقدّم بخلاف هذه الرواية َ يَ ل دبعلا ّنإف .دعب اّمأ فر َ نكي مل يذلا ءيشلا
ىلع نزحيو هتوفيِ ل نكي مل يذلا ءيشلاب ح تلِ ن ام لضفأ نكي الف هبيصيل َ في
نفسك من دنياك بلوغُ لذّة أو شفاء غَيظ ولـكن إطفاء باطل أو إحياء حقّ .١
2.67ةّكم ىلع هلماع وهو هللا همحر ساّبعلا نب مَثُ ق ىلإ مالسلا هيلع هبتك باتك
نمو أمّابعد.فأقمللناسالحجّ وذَ كِّرهمبأيّاماللهوٱجلسلهمالعصرَينفأَفْت ِ
المستفتيوعلّم الجاهل وذاكر العالم. ولا يكن لك إلى الناس سفير إلّا لسانك
ولا حاجب إلّا وجهك ولا تحجبنّ ذا حاجة عن لقائك بها فإنّها إن ذِيْدَت دمحُ ت مل
اهدرِو لّوأ يف كباوبأ نع ْ َ لَ بِق نمىلإ هفرصٱف هللا لامنم كدنععمتجٱ امىلإ
رظنٱو .اهئاضق ىلعدعب اميف كمن َ ملا عضاوم هب اً بيصم ةعاجَملاو لايعلا يذ
انيلإ هلمحٱف كلذ نع لضف امو تاّلـَ خلاو رقاف لوقي هناحبس هللا ّنإف اًرجأ
نكاس نم اوذخأي اّلأ ةّكم لهأ ْرُمو .انَ لَ بِق نميف همسقنل ﴿سَوَاءًالْعَاكِف ُ حي
يذلا يدابلاو هب ميقملا فكاعلاف﴾ِداَ بْلاَوِهيِف ُ جّ إليه من غير أهله. وفّقنا
الله وإيّاكم لمَحابّه. والسلام. 2.68ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى سلمان
الفارسيّ رحمه الله قبل أيّام خلافته صلوات الله عليه أمّا بعد. فإنّ مَث َ ل
الدنيا مَث َ ِّ يَ ل ةّيـَ حلا ل ّ لقل اهيف كبجعي اّمع ضرعأف اهُ ّمَس لتاق اهُ
ّسَم ن ة ما يصحبك منها وضَع عنك همومها لما أيقنت به من فراقها وكُن آن َ س
ما تكون بها أحذر ما تكون منها فإنّ صاحبها كلّما ٱطمأنّ فيها إلى سرور أشخصته
عنه إلى محذور.٢ ١م، ش، ن، ھ: كذا. ي، ونسخة في هامش ھ: أضيفت ⟩وليكن سرورك
بما قدّمت وأسفك علىماخلّفتوهمّكفيمابعدالموت⟨.
٢ن،م،ش:كذا.ي،ھ،وزيادةفيهامشش،م: أضيفت ⟩وإلىإيناسأزالهعنهإيحاش⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 665
2.66 From ʿAlī's letter to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās (this letter was
recorded earlier with slightly different wording):1 A man is overjoyed
by gaining a thing he was not going to lose and grieved by the loss of a
thing he was not going to gain. The choicest thing your soul takes from
your life in this world should not be a pleasure indulged or a revenge
achieved, but the obliteration of a wrong or the restoration of a right.
2.67 From a letter sent by ʿAlī to Qutham ibn al-ʿAbbās, his governor in
Mecca:2 Lead the hajj among the people and remind them to revere these,
God's special days. Hold audience every morning and evening, and explain
legal rulings to the inquirer, teach the ignorant, and discourse with
the knowledgeable. Your tongue should be your only ambassador, your face
your only chamberlain. Do not conceal yourself from any petitioner who
wants to present his petition---if a petitioner is driven away from your
door when he first approaches, you will not be thanked for a subsequent
response. Keep an eye on goods belonging to God that have accumulated in
your jurisdiction---disburse them among the destitute and the starving
in your land, those who are beset with poverty and
need;whateverremains,sendittomesothatImaydistributeitamongthepeo-
plehere.Forbidthepeopleof Meccafromchargingrenttopilgrims,forGodhas
said, «its resident and the foreigner are equal»3---a resident is one
who lives there permanently, and a foreigner is someone who has come for
the pilgrim- age. May God direct you and me both to perform the deeds
that he loves. Go in peace. 2.68 From ʿAlī's letter to Salmān al-Fārisī,
before the time of his caliphate:4 This world is like a snake---it is
soft to the touch, but its venom is lethal. Turn away from its
attractions, for it will be with you only a short while. Shrug off its
cares, for you know you will soon depart. Beware of it most when you are
most comfortable in it. For each time the dweller finds himself happy in
a joy- ful event, it hurls him toward something he had feared. 1 §2.22,
see note there. 2 From Kufa to Mecca in 38/659, when ʿAlī deputed Qutham
to lead the pilgrimage. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:132. 3 Qurʾan, Ḥajj 22:25. 4
Salmān moved to Kufa during ʿUthmān's reign (23--35/644--656). He died
in ca. 35/655 in Madāʾin (Ctesiphon), near present-day Baghdad. Hārūnī
(Taysīr, 506) says ʿAlī's letter was in response to Salmān's letter
asking him, "I fear that I may lean toward worldliness, so counsel me!"
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 666 Text and
Translation 2.69ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى الحارث الهمدانيّ .همارح مّرحو
هلالح َ ّلِحَأو هحصتنٱو نآرقلا لبحب كّسمتو وصدّق بما سلف من الحقّ وٱعتبر بما
مضى من الدنيا ما بقي منها فإنّ بعضها يشبه بعضًا وآخرها لاحق بأوّلها وكلّها
حائل مفارق. وعَظِّم ٱسمَالله أن تذ كره إلّا على حقّ . وأَكْثِر ذ َ مَ تَ ت الو
توملا دعب امو توملا رك .قيثو طرشب اّلإ توملا َ ّن لمعُ ي لمع ّلك رذحٱو
نيملسملا ةّماعل هركيو هسفنل هبحاص هاضري لمع ّلك رذحٱو به في السرّ وي ُ
ستحيى منه في العلانية وٱحذر كلّ عمل إذا سئل عنه صاحبه أنكره أو ٱعتذر منه.
ولا تجعل عِرضك غرضًا لنِبال القول. ولا تحدّث الناس بكلّ ما سمعت فكفى بذلك
كذبًا ولا تردّ على الناس كلّ ما حدّثوك به فكفى بذلك جهل ً ا كل نكت ةلودلا عم
حفصٱو ةردقلا دنع زواجتو بضغلا دنع مُ لحٱو ظْيَغلا مِظكٱو . العاقبة.
وٱستصلحكلّ نعمةأنعمهااللهعليكولات ُ كيلعَرُ يْلوكدنعهللامعننمةمعن ّنعيض
أثرُما أنعم الله به عليك. وٱعلمأنّ أفضلالمؤمنينأفضلهمت َ
قدِمةًمننفسهوأهلهومالهوأنّكماتقدّممنخير يَبقَ لك ذخره وما تؤخّر يكن لغيرك خيره.
وٱحذر صحابة من ي َ .هبحاصب رَ بتعُم بحاصلا ّنإف هلمع ركنيو هيأر ليِف وٱسكن
الأمصار العظام فإنّها جماع المسلمين وٱحذر منازل الغفلة والجفاء وقل ّ ة
الأعوان على طاعة الله. وٱقْصُرْ رأي َ ك على ما ي َ عنيك. وإيّاك ومَقاعد
الأسواق فإنّها مَحاضر١ الشيطان ومَعاريض الفتن. ١م،ش،ي،ھ:كذا.ن: ⟩محاصر⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 667
2.69 From a letter sent by ʿAlī to al-Ḥārith al-Hamdānī: Hold fast to
the Qurʾan and embrace its counsel. Deem licit what it deems licit and
deem illicit what it deems illicit. Believe in the true messages brought
in bygone times,1 and apply the lessons
youlearnfromthepasttowhatisyettocome.Onetimeresemblesanother,and the
last will catch up with the first---then all of it will end and be gone.
Exalt the name of God, do not invoke it save in truth.2 Contemplate
death and what comes after death. Don't wish for death with- out
surety.3 Beware of every deed that a man finds pleasing when he does it,
but hateful when other Muslims do it. Beware of every deed that a man
does in private and is ashamed of in public. Beware of every deed that a
man denies when asked about it or for which he offers excuses. Don't let
your honor become a target for the arrows of scandal. It is a sufficient
mark of falsehood that you pass on everything you hear, a sufficient
mark of ignorance that you dispute everything you are told. Don't
venture there! Swallow your rage, be patient in times of anger, forgive
when you could pun- ish, and pardon when you have power.4 Do this, and
the outcome will be good. Be grateful for each blessing God has
bestowed. Don't squander any of God's blessings. Let the marks of God's
blessings be manifest on your person.5 Know that the most generous of
believers is the most generous in presenting his life, his family, and
his property to God. The treasury of deeds you present will remain in
safekeeping for you, the benefits of deeds you hold back will accrue to
others. Beware of keeping company with those of unsound judgment and
evil deeds---a man is judged by the company he keeps.
Liveinlargetowns,forthatiswhereMuslimsgather.Bewareof campswhere
rashness and vulgarity prevail, where there are few allies in obedience
to God. Confine your opinions to things that concern you. Beware of
loitering in the marketplace---it is Satan's home and the place where
seditions shoot their arrows. 1 I.e., the missions of past prophets. B
927; Ḥ18:43. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:224. 3
I.e.,don'twishfordeathunlessyouaresureyourdeedswillgainyouentrytoparadise.Ḥ18:44;
B 928. Reference to Qurʾan, Jumʿah 62:6--7. 4 Reference to Qurʾan, Āl
ʿImrān 3:134. 5 Reference to Qurʾan, Ḍuḥā 93:11. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 668 Text
and Translation وأكثر أن تنظر إلى من ف ُ ضِّلت َ عليه فإنّ ذلك من أبواب
الشكر. ولا تسافر في يوم جمعة حتّى تشهد الصلاة إلّا فاصل ً .هب رذعُ ت رمأ يف
وأ هللا ليبس يف ا وأطع الله في جُم َ ل أمورك فإنّ طاعة الله فاضلة على ما
سواها. وخادِعْ نفسك في العبادة وٱرف ُ ق بها ولا تقهرها وخذ عَفْوها ونشاطها
إلّا ما كان مكتوبًا عليك من الفريضة فإنّه لا بدّ من قضائها وتعاهدها عند
محلّها. وإيّاك أن ينزل بك الموت وأنت آبق من ربّك في طلب الدنيا. وإيّاك
ومُصاحبة الفُسّاق فإنّ الشرّبالشرّمُلحَق. ووَقِّر الله وأحبب أحبّاءه. وٱحذر الغضب
فإنّه جند عظيم من جنود إبليس. والسلام. 2.70ومنكتابلهعليهالسلامإلىس َ
يراصنألافيَ نُحنبله ّ وهوعاملهعلىالمدينةفيمعنى قوم من أهلها لحقوا بمعاوية
َ لَ بِقنّمماًلاجر ّنأينغلبدقف.دعباّمأ كيتسلّلونإلىمعاويةفلاتأسفعلىمايفوتكمن
ىدهلا نم مهرارِف اً يفاش مهنم كلو اً ّيَغ مهل ىفكف مهددَم نم كنع بهذيو مهددع
والحقّ وإيضاعهم إلى العمى والجهل. وإنّما هم أهل دنيا مقبلون عليها ومُهطعون
إليها قد ىلإ اوبرهف ةَوْس ِإ ّقحلا يف اندنع سانلا ّنأ اوملعو هوَعوو هوعمسو
هوأرو لدعلا اوفرع ُ بف ةرَ ثألا عْدًا لهم وسُحقًا. إنّهم والله لم ينفروا من
جور ولم يلحقوا بعدل. وإنّا لنطمع في هذا الأمر أن يذلّل الله لنا صعبه ويسهّل
لنا حَزنه إن شاء الله. والسلام عليك. 2.71يدبعلا دوراجلا نب رِذنُ ملا ىلإ
مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو ّ وقد خان في بعض ما ولّاه من أعماله al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 669
Always think about those who have less---that door leads to gratitude.
Do not commence a journey on Friday until after the prayer, unless it is
to fight in God's path, or for another urgent matter. Obey God in all
that you do, for that is more important than anything else. Coax your
heart to worship God but be gentle and do not force its compli-
ance---take advantage of it when it first awakens and enjoys its moments
of fresh vigor. The exception is the case of mandated acts---these must
be per- formed with regularity at the prescribed times. Beware lest
death seize you while you are fleeing from your Lord in pursuit of the
world. Beware of keeping company with the depraved---vice is drawn to
vice. Extol God, and love those whom he loves. Beware of anger, for it
is one of Iblīs's most powerful battalions. Go in peace. 2.70 From a
letter sent by ʿAlī to Sahl ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī, his governor in
Medina, about a group of Medinans who had defected to join Muʿāwiyah:1 I
have learned that men from your town are stealing out to join Muʿāwiyah.
Do notgrieveoverthelossof
theirnumbersorsupplies!Theirflightfromtrueguid- ance, their haste toward
blind ignorance, proves their waywardness and shows that you are well
rid of them. They are worldly people, stretching their necks toward
wealth and power. They personally experienced my justice---they saw it,
heard it, understood it, and realized that all are equal before me in
claiming their rights---and they fled from this toward nepotism! Let
them go far away and yet farther! By God, they did not leave to escape
from injustice or to arrive at justice! I beseech God to make the
recalcitrant camel docile and the rough ground smooth. God willing, it
will happen. Go in peace. 2.71 From ʿAlī's letter to al-Mundhir ibn
al-Jārūd al-ʿAbdī, whom he had appointed tax collector in a certain
district, after Mundhir had embezzled treasury funds:2 1 Sahl was ʿAlī's
governor in Medina for a short while in 36/656, before the Battle of the
Camel, and if the letter is addressed to him, then it was sent from Iraq
at that time; it is possible that some people left Medina for Damascus
immediately after ʿAlī left for Iraq, in the lead-up to the Battle of
the Camel, and the references to witnessing ʿAlī's fairness fit well
with the steps he took to level stipends immediately upon assuming the
caliphate. Or, if there is an error in naming Sahl as the recipient, the
letter could be from after the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657. 2 Presumably
sent from Kufa to Iṣṭakhr, in Fars, where Mundhir was tax collector or
gover- nor sometime during ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661. Text and
context in Balādhurī, Ansāb, 2:163--164. The follow-up lines about
Mundhir were spoken by ʿAlī to Ṣaʿṣaʿah ibn Ṣūḥān in Kufa. Yaʿqūbī,
Tārīkh, 2:204. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 670 Text and
Translation أمّا بعد. فإنّ صلاح أبيك غرّني منك وظننت أنّك تتبع هَدْيه وتسلك
سبيله فإذا أنت فيما رُق ّ بارخب كايند رمعت اًداتَع كترخآل يقبُ ت الو اًدايقنٱ
كاوهل عدت ال كنع ّيلإ ي َ مَ جَلا ً
ّقحكنعينغلبامناكنئلو.كنيدةعيطقبكتريشعلصتوكترخآ لُ أهل ِ كوشِسعُ ن َ عل ِ ك
خير منك ومن كان بصفتك فليس بأهل أن ي ُ سَدّ به ثغر أو ينفذ به أمر أو يعلى
له قدر أو يشرك في أمانة أو يؤمن على خيانة. فأقبِل إليّحين يصل إليك كتابي
هذا إن شاء الله. والمنذر هذا هو الذي قال فيه أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام َ
نَ ل هّنإ ِ ش يف لاّفـَ ت هيَدرُ ب يف لاتخم هيَفطِع يفٌراّظ راكَيه. 2.72ومن كتاب له
عليه السلام إلى عبد الله بن العبّاس رحمه الله أمّا بعد. فإنّك لست بسابق
أجلك ولا مرزوق ما ليس لك. وٱعلم بأنّ الدهر يومان يوم لك ويوم عليك وأنّ
الدنيا دارُدُوَل فما كان منها لك أتاك على ضعفك وما كان منها عليك لم تدفعه
بقوّتك. 2.73ومن كتاب له عليه السلام إلى معاوية أمّا بعد. فإن ّ ُ مَ ل كباتك
ىلإ عامتسالاو كباوج يف دّدرتلا ىلع ي وَهِّنٌ رأيي ومُخطّئ فِراستي وإنّك إذ
تحاولني الأمور وتراجعني السطور كالمستثقل النائم ت َ كذبه أحلامه أو
المتحيّر َ هبَ ي مئاقلا هللاب مسقأو .هيبش كب هّنأ ريغ هب تسلو هيلع مأ يتأي
امٗ هَ لَأ يردي ال هماقم هظ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 671
I was deceived about you by your father's piety---I thought you would
follow his guidance and walk his path. According to what I have learned,
however, you neither pull against passion's halter, nor put aside
provisions for the next world---you adorn your abode in this world by
demolishing your home in the hereafter, you strengthen bonds of
gift-giving with kin by severing the bonds of your faith. If what I am
told about you is true, your family's mangy pack-camel and your sandal's
frayed thong are more valuable than you! Someone with your immoral
character cannot be expected to fill a breach or carry out a command, he
cannot be raised in station, given partnership in matters of
responsibility, or trusted not to embezzle. Come to me when my letter,
God willing, reaches you. Raḍī: Mundhir is the one about whom the
Commander of the Faithful also said: He looks at himself in glee, preens
in his pretty robes, and shines his sandal straps with his spittle. 2.72
From ʿAlī's letter to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās:1 You will not exceed your
lifespan or be granted sustenance that is not yours. Know that life
alternates between two days---one day is for you, another day is against
you. The world is an abode of change---whatever is decreed for you will
come despite your weakness, whatever is decreed against you cannot be
repelled by your strength. 2.73 From ʿAlī's letter to Muʿāwiyah:2 I
attribute to weak judgment and flawed acumen the fact that I exchanged
let- ters with you in the first place and listened to your epistles at
all! When you make such demands of me and repeat such lines, you are
like a man deep in slumberwho dreamsfalse dreams,or likeone
whostandsperplexed,notknow- ing whether the future will be for or
against him! If you are not that man, then that man certainly resembles
you! I swear this by God: If I did not have good reasons to hold my
tongue, you would have received evidence from it damning 1 Possibly part
of the same letter sent from Kufa to Mecca in 40/661, parts recorded as
§2.22 (see note there), §2.41, and §2.66. 2 Presumably from Kufa to
Damascus after the arbitration in 37/658, in the context of Muʿāwi-
yah's demand that ʿAlī make him successor (similar themes in §2.65).
"Listened (istimāʿ) to your epistles" signals the practice of official
epistles being read out in a public setting; see also §2.1. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 672 Text and
Translation لولا بعض الاستبقاء لوصلت إليك منّي نوازع١ ت َ قرع العَظْم وتَهل
ِ س٢ اللحم. وٱعلم أنّ الشيطان قد ثبّطك عن أن تراجع أحسن أمورك وتأذن لمقال
نصيحك.٣ والسلام. 2.74ومن حِلف كتبه عليه السلام بين اليمن وربيعة ن ُ قل من
خط ّ هشام بن الكلبيّ
هذاماٱجتمععليهأهلاليمنحاضرهاوباديهاوربيعةحاضرهاوباديهاأنّهمعلىكتاب نوضري
الو اً نمث هب نورتشي ال هب رمأو هيلإ اعد نم نوبيجيو هب نورمأيو هيلإ نوعدي
هللا به بدلًا وأنّهم يد واحدة على من خالف ذلك وتر كه أنصارٌ بعضهم لبعض
دعوتهم٤ اًموق موق لالذتسٱل الو بضاغ بضغل الو بتاع ةبتعَ مل مهدهع نوضقني ال
.ةدحاو ولا لم َ سبّة قوم قومًا. على ذلك شاهدهم وغائبهم وحليمهم وجاهلهم.
ثمّإنّ عليهم بذلك عهد الله وميثاقه . وكتب عليّبن أبي طالب. 2.75ومن كتاب له
عليه السلام إلى معاوية من المدينة في أوّل ما بويع له وذ كره الواقدي ّ في
كتاب الجمل
منعبداللهعليّأميرالمؤمنينإلىمعاويةبنأبيسفيان.أمّابعد.فقدعلمتإعذاريفيكم
١ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩قوارع⟨. ٢م،ي،ومصحّحةفيھ:كذا.ن،وأصل
ھ،ومصحّحةفيش،ونسخةفيي: ⟩تلهس⟨.نسخةثالثةفيي،ھ: ⟩تنهس⟨. ٣ش،ھ:كذا. م، ي:
⟩نصيحتك⟨. ن: ⟩فصيحك⟨. ٤م، ي، ونسخة في ش، ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ھ، ونسخةفيي:
⟩دعوة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 673
enough to crush bones and consume flesh!1 But know this: It is Satan who
pre- vents you from returning to a better way, or from listening to the
words of a sincere counselor. Go in peace. 2.74 From a treaty of
alliance that ʿAlī concluded between the people of Yemen and the tribe
of Rabīʿah (copied here from a script in the hand of Hishām Ibn
al-Kalbī):2 This is what the people of Yemen, both its townspeople and
its country- dwellers, and the tribe of Rabīʿah, both its townspeople
and its country-
dwellers,haveagreedupon:TheywillfollowGod'sBook---theywillcalltoitand
command by it, and answer those who call to it and command by it; they
will not betray it for a price or accept another in its place; they will
act as one hand against all who oppose or abandon it. They will support
one another---their mission will be one. They will not break their
pledge, even if one tribesman hurls rebuke, rage, humiliation, or abuse
at another.This agreement has hereby been accepted by all present as
well as those absent, mature elders as well as impetuous youths. They
are bound to it through God's pledge, to which all are accountable.3
Written by ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. 2.75 From ʿAlī's letter to Muʿāwiyah from
Medina, when allegiance was first pledged to him as caliph. (It is
recorded by Wāqidī in the Book of the Camel, Kitāb al-Jamal):4 From
God's servant, ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, to Muʿāwiyah ibn Abī
Sufyān. You know that I was justified both in my efforts for your clan
and in turning away from them, until that which was going to happen,
that which could not be repelled, came to pass.5 The story is long and
there is much to be said, but 1 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ17:65) explains that
ʿAlī had witnesses to the fact that the Prophet had cursed Muʿāwiyah as
a hypocrite destined for hellfire, and that he chose not to make this
information public for fear of Muʿāwiyah's false retaliation. 2 Rabīʿah
and Yemen signify North and South Arabia respectively. Hishām ibn
Muḥammad ibn al-Sāʾib al-Kalbī (= Ibn al-Kalbī) (d. 206/821) is the
famous genealogist, whose grandfather, Sāʾib fought alongside ʿAlī in
the Battles of the Camel and Ṣiffīn. Ibn al-Kalbī is the compiler of a
lost book titled Khuṭab ʿAlī (Orations of ʿAlī, Ibn al-Nadīm,
al-Fihrist, 125). The treaty would have been concluded some time in
ʿAlī's caliphate in Kufa, 35--40/656--661. 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Isrāʾ
17:34. 4 In 35/656. 5 The reference is to ʿAlī's efforts to negotiate
between ʿUthmān, who was from Muʿāwiyah's Umayyad clan, and the group of
Muslims who had come to Medina demanding his resigna- tion and who
eventually killed him (Ḥ18:67; B 932). Another, to me less convincing,
reading (R 3:258) is that the reference is to ʿAlī's efforts to appease
Muʿāwiyah when ʿAlī first became caliph. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 674 Text
and Translation وإعراضي عنكم حتّى كان ما لا بدّ منه ولا دفع له والحديث
طويل والكلام كثير وقد .مالسلاو .كباحصأ نم دفَو يف ّيلإ لبقأو كلَ بِق نَم
عيابف .لبقأ ام لبقأو ربدأ ام ربدأ 2.76ومن وصيّته عليه السلام لعبد الله بن
العبّاس عند ٱستخلافه إيّاه على البصرة ملعٱو .ناطيشلا نمٌةرَ يِط هّنإف بضغلاو
كاّيإو .كمكحو كسلجمو كهجوب سانلا ١ِعَس أنّ ما قرّبك من الله يباعدك من النار
وما باعدك من الله يقرّبك من النار. 2.77جراوخلا ىلع جاجتحالل هثعب اّ مل
مالسلا هيلع هل هتّيصو نمو ةّنسلاب ٢مه َ ّجاح نكـلو نولوقيو لوقت هوجو وذ
ٌلاّمَح نآرقلا ّنإف نآرقلاب مهمصاخت ال فإنّهم لن يجدوا عنها مَحيصًا. 2.78ومن
كتاب له عليه السلام إلى أبي موسى الأشعري ّ جوابًا في أمر الح َ كَمين ذ كره
سعيد ٱبن يحيى الأموي ّ في المغازي فإنّ الناس قد تغيّر كثير منهم عن كثير من
حظّهم فمالوا مع الدنيا ونطقوا بالهوى. وإن ّ ي اًحْرَ
قمهنميوادأانأفمهسفنأمهتبجعأماوقأهبعمتجٱاً بِجعُماًلزنمرمألااذهنمتلزن َ لَ ع
٣دوعي نأ فاخأ قًا. وليس رجل فٱعلم أحرص على جماعة أمّة محمّد وألفتها منّي
أبتغي بذلك حسن الثواب و كرم المآب وسأفي بالذي وأيت على نفسي وإن تغيّرت َ
عن صالح ١ن،ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفيم:كذا.وأصلم: ⟩مَتِّـع⟨. ٢ش،م،ي،ھ:كذا.ن: ⟩خاصِمهم⟨.
٣م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،ھ،وأصلش: ⟩يكون⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
2: Letters 675 what has passed has passed, and what is coming is coming.
Take the pledge of allegiance for me, then, from your townspeople, and
come to me here with a delegation of your associates. Go in peace. 2.76
From ʿAlī's counsel to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās when ʿAlī departed from
Basra, and appointed Ibn al-ʿAbbās to remain there as governor:1 Be
generous with your attention, your audiences, and your judgment. Beware
of anger, for it is a surge of rashness prompted by Satan. Know that
whatever takes you closer to God takes you away from the Fire, and
whatever takes you away from God takes you closer to the Fire. 2.77 From
ʿAlī's counsel to ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās when he sent him to debate the
Kharijites:2 Don't argue with them on the basis of the Qurʾan, for the
Qurʾan can be inter- preted in many ways---you will say something, and
they will say something else. Debate with them instead with the Sunnah,
for there they will find no escape. 2.78 From ʿAlī's letter to Abū Mūsā
al-Ashʿarī, replying to him in the matter of the arbitrators (recorded
by Saʿīd ibn Yaḥyā al-Umawī in his book The Expeditions, al- Maghāzī):3
Thestateof thepeopleissuchthatmanyhavebarteredawaymostof theirallot- ted
share,4 they sway with the world's swaying and speak from sheer caprice.
In the matter at hand, I am astonished that my camp has become a gath-
ering place for the conceited and the disobedient. I treat the wound
they have inflicted,5 but fear that it might suddenly spurt blood again.
There is no man---and you should know this---who is more concerned than
I am to main- tain unity and affection among Muḥammad's community. I
seek only God's 1 In 36/656, after the Battle of the Camel. Mufīd,
Jamal, 223--224, after Wāqidī. 2 Soon after the Battle of Ṣiffīn in
37/657, when the Kharijites faulted ʿAlī for accepting the arbi- tration
and encamped at Ḥarūrāʾ. Context in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:73. 3 In the
lead-up to arbitration at Dūmat al-Jandal in 37/657--658. Abū Mūsā
al-Ashʿarī was the arbitrator from ʿAlī's side, and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣfrom
Muʿāwiyah's. This letter signals ʿAlī's dis- trust of Abū Mūsā. Ḥ18:75.
4 I.e., of religion and the hereafter. 5 Refers to both the arbitration
with Muʿāwiyah, which a group of ʿAlī's own army forced him to accept,
even though they were on the verge of victory, and the choice of Abū
Mūsā as the arbitrator from their side, who was not loyal to ʿAlī. See
also §2.63. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 676 Text and
Translation ما فارقتني عليه فإنّ الشقيّ مَن حُرِم نفع ما أوتي من العقل
والتجربة. وإن ّ ي لَأَعْب َ دُ١ أن يقول قائلٌ بباطل وأن أُفسد أمرًا قد أصلحه
الله. فدَع ما لا تعرف فإنّ ش ِ رار الناس طائرون إليك بأقاويل السوء. زيادة
على الأصل٢ 2.79دانجألا ءارمأ ىلإ فلختسٱ اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هل باتك نمو أمّا
بعد. فإنّما أهلك من كان قبلـكم أنّهم منعوا الناس الحقّ فٱشترَوه وأخذوهم
بالباطل فٱقتدَوه. ١م، ي، ھ: كذا. ن، ش: ⟩لَأَعْي َ د⟨. ٢أضيفت هنا في جميع
المخطوطات زيادة على الأصل،
وهيعبارةعنكتابآخرلعليّمسبوقفيمخطوطةھومخطوطةلبسطريشيرالىأنّهزيادةعلى
أصلالرضيّ: ⟩زيادةمننسخةكتبتعلىعهدالمصنّف⟨.والكتابساقطعنمتنمخطوطةم،
وأضيفتفيالهامش.وهومثبتفيمتونمخطوطةي،ش،نمنغيرإشارةإلىأنّهازائدة. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 2: Letters 677
pleasing reward and an honorable return to him, and I shall remain true
to my pledge, even if you move away from the position that you held when
you left here. The true wretch is the person who is deprived from using
his own intel- ligence and experience, and I refuse to let anyone speak
what is wrong or to blight a matter that God has resolved. Don't heed
false suspicions---the foulest of men are racing to you now, carrying
wicked rumors. Additional Letter1 2.79 From a missive ʿAlī wrote to
governors of the garrison towns when he became caliph:
Governorsbeforeyouweredestroyedbythis:Theydeniedthepeopletheirrights,sothe
people were forced to purchase them. They ruled the people unjustly, and
the people emulated their injustice. 1 An additional letter---perhaps
added by Raḍī, or by others---is transcribed in all our primary and
secondary Nahj al-Balāghah manuscripts (further details in the Edition's
footnotes, and in Note on the Edition and Translation). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 باب المختار من حكم
أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ومواعظه ويدخل في ذلك المختار من أجوبة مسائله
والكلام القصير الخارج في سائر أغراضه 3.1ُ يف ٌعرَض الو بكرُ يفٌ رهظ ال نوُ بَ
ّللا نبٱكةنتفلا يف نك:مالسلا هيلع لاق حل َ ب. 3.2وقال عليه السلام هسفن
هيلع تناهو هّرض فشك نم ّلذلاب يضرو عَم َ ّطلا رعشتسٱ نم هسفنب ىرزَأ من أمّر
عليها لسانه. .هتدلب يف بيرغ ّلِقُ ملاو هتّجح نع نِطَفلا سرخُي رقفلاو ةصقنَم
نبـجلاوٌراع لخبلاو والعجز آفة والصبر شجاعة والزهد ثروة والورع جُنّة ونعم
القرين الرضى. والعلم وراثةكريمة والآداب حُل َ ل مُجدّدة والفكر مِرآة صافية.
وصدر العاقل صُندوق سرّه. والب َ شاشة حِبالة المودّة والاحتمال قبر العيوب.
وروي أنّه عليه السلام قال في العبارة عن هذا المعنى أيضًا: الم ُ سالم َ ة
خَبء العيوب. ومن رضي عن نفسهكثر الساخط عليه. والصدقة دواء مُنجِح. وأعمال
العباد في عاجلهم ن َ ص ْ ب .مهلجآ يف مهنُ يعَأ َ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera
Qutbuddin, 2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_005d This is an open access
chapter distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. 3
Sayings Chapter containing selections from the Commander of the
Faithful's wise sayings and words of counsel, including selections from
his answers to questions and short texts from all genres of his literary
production 3.1 In times of sedition, be like a young camel buck---no
back to be ridden, no udders to be milked.1 3.2 To wear the robe of
greed is to degrade yourself. To reveal your troubles to others is to
humiliate yourself. To let your tongue control you is to demean
yourself.2 Stinginess is a vice, cowardice is a defect, poverty strikes
a clever man dumb, and a pauper is an exile in his hometown. Incapacity
is a calamity, forbearance is a form of courage, renunciation is a
treasure, restraint is a shield, and acceptance of God's will is the
best compan- ion. Knowledge is a noble legacy, refined behavior is like
new clothing, and thought is a polished mirror. A wise man's heart is a
vault for his secrets. Cheerfulness is a snare for friendship,
forbearance is a tomb for shortcom- ings. Raḍī: It is also narrated that
ʿAlī said similarly: Conciliation is a tomb for flaws. The smug invite
detractors. Almsgiving is powerful medicine. Believers' deeds in this
world will be placed before them in the hereafter. 1
Ar.ibnal-labūn,lit."thesonof
alactatingcamelmare,"referringtoabuckthathasjustreached two years of
age---his mother has had another foal and is again producing milk---he
has no udders because he's male and his back is weak because he's young.
ʿAlī advises his followers to be shrewd in times of conflict, so that
despotic rulers are not able to harness their support for evil acts or
bully them (Ḥ18:82; B 935; R 3:267; F 397). From ʿAlī's counsel to his
son Ḥasan (Majlisī, Biḥār, 74:234). 2 The sayings in §3.2 are from
ʿAlī's counsel to Ashtar. Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 201--202. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 680 Text
and Translation 3.3َ لب مّلكتيو محَشب رظني ناسنإلا اذهل اوبَ جعِا :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو حم ويسمع بعَظم ويتنفّس من خُرم. 3.4وقال عليه السلام: إذا أقبلت
الدنيا على أحد أعارته محاسن غيره وإذا أدبرت عنه سلبته محاسن نفسه.
3.5وقال عليه السلام: خال ِ طوا الناس مُخال َ طة إن مُتّم معها ب َ كَوا عليكم
وإن عِشتم١ حَنّوا إليكم. 3.6.هيلع ةردقلل اً ركش هنع وفعلا لعجٱف كّودع ىلع
تردق اذإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.7وقال عليه السلام: أعجز الناس من عجز عن
ٱكتساب الإخوان وأعجز منه من ضيّع من ظفر به منهم. 3.8وقال عليه السلام في
الذين ٱعتزلوا القتال معه خذلوا الحقّ ولم ينصروا الباطل. 3.9وقال عليه
السلام: إذا وصلت إليكم أطراف النعم فلا تنفّروا أقصاها بقل ّ ة الشكر.
3.10وقال عليه السلام: من ضيّعه الأقرب أُتيح له الأبعد. 3.11.بَتاعُ ي نوتفم
ّلُك ام :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ١م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش: ⟩غبتم⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 681
3.3 Behold the wonder of the human! He sees with a bit of fat, speaks
with a piece of flesh, hears with a shard of bone, and breathes through
a tiny hole! 3.4 When the world smiles at a person, it lends him the
good qualities of oth- ers. When it turns away from him, it snatches
from him his own.1 3.5 Associate with people in such a manner that they
cherish your company while you live and weep for your loss when you
die.2 3.6 If you succeed in subduing your enemy, thank God by forgiving
the man. 3.7 Themostincapablepersonintheworldistheonewhoisincapableof
mak- ing friends. Even more incapable than he, though, is the person who
loses the friends he has made. 3.8 ʿAlī said this about the men who sat
out the battles during his reign:3 They abandoned right, while not
aiding wrong. 3.9 If the harbingers of God's blessings reach you, don't
drive away the favors yet to come with a lack of gratitude. 3.10 A man
who is shunned by those close to him will find help from distant
strangers. 3.11 Not every deluded person can be chastised.4 1 I.e., when
a person's luck is in, people attribute to him qualities he doesn't
have, but when his luck is out, they don't give him credit for the
qualities he does have. 2 Or, per the variant reading in mss N and Sh,
"they long for you when you are absent (ghib- tum, vs. ʿishtum), and
weep for your loss when you die." From ʿAlī's deathbed counsel to his
children (Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 142; Ṭūsī, Amālī, 209). I have switched the
two phrases around in the translation for more idiomatic English. 3
These were the prominent Medinans ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar, Saʿd ibn Abī
Waqqāṣ, Saʿīd ibn Zayd, Usāmah ibn Zayd, Muḥammad ibn Maslamah, and Anas
ibn Mālik (Ḥ18:115; text and context in Ṭūsī, Amālī, 83). According to
some commentators, they also include the Kufans Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī and
Aḥnaf ibn Qays (B 939; F 402). 4 Interpreted as (1) a reference to the
prominent Medinans who refused to support ʿAlī against the associates of
the Camel (Ḥ18:119; Mufīd, Jamal, 46; names in note to §3.8), or (2) a
general observation on human nature (F 401; B 938). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 682 Text
and Translation 3.12وقال عليه السلام: ت َ .ريبدتلا يف فتَ حلا نوكي ىّتح
ريداقملل رومألا ّلذ 3.13وسئل عليه السلام عن قول النبيّ صل ّ .⟨دوهيلاب
اوهّبشت الو بي َ ّشلا اورِّيَ غ⟩ هلآو هيلع هللا ى فقال عليه السلام إنّما قال
صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ذلك والدين ق ُ لٌّ فأمّا الآن وقد ٱت ّ سع ن ِ طاقه
وضرب ب ِ جِرانه فٱمرؤٌوما ٱختار. 3.14.هلجأب رثَ ع هلمأ نانِع يف ىرج نم
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.15هللاديبهديواّلإرثاعمهنمرثعيامفمهتارثعتاّورُ
ملايوذاوليقأ:مالسلاهيلعلاقو يرفعه. 3.16.نامرحلاب ءايحلاو ةبيخلاب ةبيهلا
تنرُ ق :مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ رُ ف اوزهتنٱف باحسلا ّرَمّرُ مت ةصرفلاو ص الخـير.
3.17.ىرُ ّسلا لاط نإو لبإلا زاجعأ انبكر اّلإو هانيطعُأ نإف ّقح انل :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو طعُ نملنإاّنأهانعموهحيصفومالكلافيطلنماذهو بكريفيدرلا
ّنأكلذوءاّلذأاّ نكانّقح َ .امهارجم يرجي نمو ريسألاو دبعلاك ريعبلا زُ جَع
3.18وقال عليه السلام: من أبطأ به عمله لم يسرع به حسبه. 3.19وقال عليه
السلام: من كفّارات الذنوب العظام إغاثة الملهوف والتنفيس عن المكروب.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 683
3.12 Affairs bow to the fates---sometimes planning leads to death.1 3.13
ʿAlī was asked about the Prophet's words, ⟨Dye your white hair and don't
emulate the Jews⟩, to which he answered:2 The Prophet said this when
Muslims were few. Now that Islam has loosened its halter and laid its
withers flat on the ground, let every man decide for himself. 3.14
Whoever gallops forward, giving the rein to his hopes, will be hurled
into the pit of death. 3.15 Forgive good people their mistakes---when
one of them slips, God takes his hand and helps him to rise. 3.16 The
timid will falter, the meek will lose their share. Opportunity passes
like a cloud, so seize every opportunity for good. 3.17 We have a right.
If it is given to us, good. If not, we will ride the camel's rump
through the long night.3 Raḍī: This statement is among the most refined
and eloquent of expressions, and it means that when we are not given our
due, we are being dishonored; that is because a pillion rider rides on
the camel's rump, as does a slave, or captive, or another person of
lowly status. 3.18 If your deeds are slow, your lineage will not take
you far.4 3.19 To console the heartbroken and comfort the grieving is to
atone for the gravest sins. 1 In an address to the Persian emperor's
daughter Shāh Zanān (= Shahr Banū) after her capture, ca. 17/638 (Mufīd,
Irshād, 1:302). Similar to §3.426. 2 The hadith is cited by, e.g., Ibn
Ḥanbal, Musnad, §1415. The command is for men to dye white hair black in
battle and pertains to the importance of appearing young and strong in
order to instill fear in the enemy (Ḥ18:122; B 939; R 3:269; F 402). The
metaphor of the camel relaxing indicates Islam's expansion and firm
establishment. 3 The sources place these words by ʿAlī in Medina, either
(1) immediately after the death of the Prophet, in 11/632, when Abū Bakr
was sworn in as caliph (Ḥ18:133, citing the Twelver Shiʿa
interpretation); or (2) in ʿAlī's oration to the Shūrā Election Council,
following the death of ʿUmar, in 23/644 (Ṭabarī,Tārīkh, 4:236; Māmaṭīrī,
Nuzhah, 327--328; full text in both; Ḥ18:133). 4 The line is attributed
to the Prophet in Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 2:252; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd,
2:148; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ, 3:573. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 684 Text and
Translation 3.20وقال عليه السلام: يا ٱبن آدم إذا رأيت ربّك سبحانه يتابع
عليك نعمه فٱحذره. 3.21.ههجو تاحفصو هناسل تاتَ لَ ف يف رهظ اّلإ اً ئيش دحأ
رمضأ ام :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.22وقال عليه السلام: اِمشِ ب ِ دائك ما مشى بك.
3.23وقال عليه السلام: أفضل الزهد إخفاء الزهد. 3.24.ىقتلُ ملا عرسأ امف
لابقإ يف توملاو رابدإ يف تنك اذإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.25وقال عليه السلام:
الحذرَالحذرَفوالله لقد ستر حتّى كأنّه قد غفر. 3.26وسئل عليه السلام عن
الإيمان فقال
الإيمانعلىأربعدعائمعلىالصبرواليقينوالعدلوالجهاد.فالصبرمنهاعلىأربعشُعَب
قفشأنموتاوهشلانعالسةّنجلاىلإقاتشٱنمفبُ ّقرتلاودهزلاوقَف َ ّشلاوقوشلاىلع من
النار ٱجتنب المحرّمات ومن زهد في الدنيا ٱستهان بالمصيبات ومن ٱرتقب الموت
ةمكحلا ل ُ ّوأتو ةنطفلا ةرصبت ىلع بعش عبرأ ىلع اهنم نيقيلاو .تاريـخلا
ىلإ عراس
وموعظةالعبرةوسنّةالأوّلينفمنتبصّرفيالفطنةتبيّنتلهالحكمةومنتبيّنتلهالحكمة
عرفالعبرةومنعرفالعبرةفكأنّماكانفيالأوّلين.والعدلمنهاعلىأربعشعبعلى
غائصالفهموغَورالعلموزَهرةالح ُ كمورساخةالحلمفمنفهمعلمغورالعلمومنعلمغور
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 685
3.20 Son of Adam! When your Lord's blessings keep coming, be on guard!1
3.21 When a person conceals something in his heart, it shows in the
slips of his tongue and the planes of his face. 3.22 If you fall ill,
get on with your life as best as you can. 3.23 Rejection of worldliness
is best done in secret. 3.24 How soon the meeting when you retreat and
death presses forward! 3.25 Fear God and beware! I swear he has
concealed for so long you think he has forgiven! 3.26 ʿAlī was asked
about faith, and he expounded:2 Faith stands on four pillars:
forbearance, conviction, justice, and struggle against evil. Forbearance
has four branches: longing, fear, rejection of world- liness, and
patient expectation. Whoever longs for paradise is diverted from
indulging passions, whoever fears hellfire retreats from forbidden
things, who- ever rejects worldliness makes light of calamities, and
whoever awaits death hastens to do good. Conviction also has four
branches: sagacious perceptivity, interpreting divine wisdom, heeding
the counsel offered by history's lessons, and following the practice of
those who went before. Whoever perceives with sagacity recognizes divine
wisdom, whoever recognizes divine wisdom heeds history's lessons, and
whoever heeds history's lessons has lived with those who went before.
Justice, in its turn, has four branches: deep understanding, pro- found
knowledge, blossoms of wisdom, and deep-rooted restraint. Whoever
understands gains profound knowledge, whoever gains profound knowledge 1
I.e.,if
youcontinuetobeungratefulanddisobeyGodwhilestillenjoyinghisblessings,beware
his retribution, which will surely come (F 403). Some later mss and
commentaries (Ḥ18:136 and B 940) make this subtext explicit by adding to
the text, "while you continue to disobey him" (wa-anta taʿṣīhi). 2
Excerpt from oration delivered in his home, either in Medina or Kufa,
additional parts recorded as §1.69, §1.103 (further details in note
there), §3.259. Alternatively, the text is cited as an answer given
during an oration in the mosque in Basra, a few days after the Battle of
the Camel in 36/656 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 225--227), where the questioner
is named as ʿAbbād ibn Qays (another version, which conforms more
directly to the version here, is also recorded in ibid., 198--199).
Other parts of the same oration (ibid., 221--233) are listed in note to
§1.23. On this text, see Qutbuddin, "Piety and Virtue in Early Islam:
Two Sermons by Imam Ali." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 686 Text and
Translation العلم صدر عن شرائع الحكم ومن حلم لم يفرط في أمره وعاش في
الناس حميدًا. والجهاد
منهاعلىأربعشعبعلىالأمربالمعروفوالنهيعنالمنكروالصدقفيالمواطنوشنآن
الفاسقين فمن أمر بالمعروف شدّ ظهور المؤمنين ومن نهى عن المنكر أرغم أنوف
المنافقين ومن صدق في المواطن قضى ما عليه ومن شَنئ الفاسقين وغضب لله غضب
الله له وأرضاه يوم القيامة. بِنُ ي مل قّمعت نمف قاقشلاو غيزلاو عزانتلاو
قّمعتلا ىلع مئاعد عبرأ ىلع رفكـلاو إلى الحقّ ومن كثر نزاعه بالجهل دام عماه
عن الحقّ ومن زاغ ساءت عنده الحسنة وحسنت عنده السيّئة وسَكِر سُكر الضلالة ومن
شاق هيلع لضعأو هقرط هيلع ترُعَو َ ّ أمره وضاق مخرجه. والشكّ على أربع شعب
على التماري واله َ ول والتردّد والاستسلام دّدرت نمو هبيقع ىلع صكن هيدي نيب
ام هلاه نمو هليل حبصي مل اًنَدْيَد ءارِ ملا لعج نمف في الريب وطئته سَناب ِ ك
الشياطين ومن ٱستسلم لهلـكة الدنيا والآخرة هلك فيهما. وبعد هذا كلام تركنا
ذ كره خوف الإطالة والخروج عن الغرض المقصود في هذا الكتاب. 3.27وقال عليه
السلام: فاعل الخـير خير منه وفاعل الشرّشرّمنه. 3.28وقال عليه السلام: كن
سَمْحًا ولا تكن مُبذِّرًا وكن مُقدِّرًا ولا تكن مُقتِّرًا. 3.29.ىنُ ملا كرت ىنغلا فرشأ
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.30وقال عليه السلام: من أسرع إلى الناس بما يكرهون
قالوا فيه ما لا يعلمون. 3.31وقال عليه السلام: من أطال الأمل أساء العمل.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 687
advances on the path of wisdom, and whoever possesses restraint shuns
ex- tremes in his affairs and lives among people loved and respected.
Struggle against evil similarly has four branches: commanding good,
forbidding evil, valor in battle, and abhorring the corrupt. Whoever
commands good strength- ens the believers' backs, whoever forbids evil
cuts off the hypocrites' noses, whoever shows valor in battle has
discharged his duty, and whoever abhors the corrupt and is roused to
anger for the sake of God, so too will God be roused to anger on his
behalf, and, on the day of resurrection, will make him truly happy.
Unbelief stands on four pillars: overthinking, fractiousness, deviation,
and rebellion. Whoever overthinks misses what is right, whoever
constantly dis- putes remains blind to the truth, whoever deviates deems
good to be evil and evil to be good until he becomes intoxicated by his
errant ways, and whoever
rebelsfindshiswayrugged,hisaffairsstraitened,andhisescapeblocked.Doubt
also has four branches: skepticism, dread, vacillation, and surrender.
Whoever makes skepticism his practice finds that his night never
brightens into day, whoever dreads what is ahead turns back on his
heels, whoever is suspicious and vacillates is trampled by devils'
hooves, and whoever surrenders to the per- ishing forces of this world
and the next perishes in both. Raḍī:There is text after this that I have
omitted, for fear of being prolix or going beyond the book's goals. 3.27
The doer of a good deed is better than the deed itself. The doer of an
evil deed is worse than the deed itself. 3.28 Be generous without being
extravagant. Be thrifty without being stingy. 3.29 The most honorable
wealth is abandoned desire.1 3.30 If you are quick to say bad things
about people, they will make up things about you. 3.31 Long hopes, foul
deeds. 1 Identical line in §3.195. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 688 Text and
Translation
3.32وقالعليهالسلاموقدلقيهعندمسيرهإلىالشامدَهاقينالأنبارفترجّلوالهوٱشتدّوابين
يديه ما هذا الذي صنعتموه فقالوا خُل ُ مالسلا هيلع لاقف انءارمأ هب مِّظعُ ن
اّنم ق واللهماينتفعبهذاأمراؤ كموإنّكملت َ شُقّونبهعلىأنفسكموت َ
شقَونبهفيآخرتكموماأخسر المشقّة وراءها العقاب وأربح الدعة معها الأمان من
النار. 3.33وقال لٱبنه الحسن عليهما السلام َ نُ ب اي يّ ٱحفظ عنّي أربعًا
وأربعًا لا يضرّك ما عملت َ معهنّ إنّ أغنى الغنى العقل َ نُ ب اي .قلخلا نسح
بسحلا مركأو بجُعلا ةشحولا شحوأو قمُ حلا رقفلا ربكأو يّ إيّاك ومُصادقةَ الأحمق
فإنّه يريد أن ينفعك فيضرّك وإيّاك ومصادقة البخيل فإنّه ي َ قعُد عنك أَحْوَج ما
تكون إليه وإيّاك ومصادقة الفاجر١ فإنّه يبيعك بالتافِه وإيّاك ومصادقة .بيرقلا
كيلع دعبُ يو ديعبلا كيلع بّرقي بارَ ّسلاكهّنإف باّذكـلا 3.34وقال عليه السلام:
لا قربة بالنوافل إذا أضرّت بالفرائض. 3.35وقال عليه السلام لسان العاقل
وراء قلبه وقلب الأحمق وراء لسانه. وهذا من المعاني العجيبة الشريفة
والمراد به أنّ العاقل لا يطلق لسانه إلّا بعد مُشاورة الرويّة .هيأر ةضخاممو
هركف ةعجارم همالك تاتَ لَ فو هناسل تافَذَخ قبست قمحألاو ةركفلا ةرماؤمو فكأنّ
لسان العاقل تابع لقلبه وكأنّ قلب الأحمق تابع للسانه. وقد روي عنه عليه
السلام هذا المعنى بلفظ آخر وهو قوله ⟩قلب الأحمق في فيه ولسان العاقل في
قلبه⟨ومعناهما واحد. ١م،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:كذا.ن،وأصلش: ⟩العاجز⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 689
3.32 At Anbar, during ʿAlī's march to Syria, its landowners and
merchants came out to meet him, and when they reached him, they
dismounted and began to run ahead of his mount on foot. He asked, "What
is it you are doing?" and they answered, "This is our custom---it is our
way of showing respect to our rulers." ʿAlī responded:1 By God, this
behavior does not benefit your rulers at all! All you are doing is
causing suffering to yourself while earning wretchedness for the
hereafter. O how great the loss when suffering is followed by
punishment! How great the profit when ease is followed by freedom from
hellfire! 3.33 ʿAlī said to his son Ḥasan:2 My dear son, remember four
things from me, and four things more---nothing will harm you as long as
you follow them. The best wealth is intelligence, the greatest poverty
is foolishness, the loneliest alienation comes from conceit, and the
noblest lineage is good character. My dear son, beware of befriend- ing
a fool---he wants to help you but will harm you. Beware of befriending a
miser---he will hold back from helping you when you need him most.
Beware of befriending a wanton---he will sell you out for a trifle.
Beware of befriending a liar---he is like a mirage that makes near what
is distant and makes distant what is near. 3.34 Supplementary acts of
worship bring no reward if they cause you to neglect mandatory ones.3
3.35 ʿAlī said: A sage's tongue is located behind his heart, a fool's
heart is located behind his tongue. Raḍī: This is among the most
wondrous and noblest of concepts. The point is that an intelligent man
doesn't allow his tongue free rein until after consulting with his mind
and conferring with his reason, while the pebbles flung by the fool's
tongue and the blunders of his speech race out of his mouth without
being reviewed by his reason or assessed by his thought. The intelligent
man's tongue follows his heart, while the fool's heart follows his
tongue. The aphorism has also been narrated from ʿAlī in a variant
rendering, thus: ⟨A fool's heart is located in his mouth, a sage's
tongue is located in his heart.⟩The meaning of both versions is the
same. 1 In 36/656, during the march toward Ṣiffīn. Anbar is in northern
Iraq, and the merchant fam- ily is named as the Banū Khushnūshak
(Persian name). Text and context in Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 143--144. 2
This text is among ʿAlī's deathbed counsels to Ḥasan. Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah,
182--183, Hārūnī, Taysīr, 563, Quḍāʿī, Dustūr, 100--101, Ibn ʿAsākir,
Tārīkh, 42:561. 3 Similar to §3.271. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 690 Text
and Translation 3.36وقال عليه السلام لبعض أصحابه في عل ّ ة ٱعتلّها ُ حَي
هّنكـلو هيف رجأ ال ضرملا ّنإف .كتائّيسل ا ً ّطَح كاوكش نم ناك ام هللا لعج ط
ّ تَحاهّتُ حَيوتائّيسلا ّ
الأوراقوإنّماالأجرفيالقولباللسانوالعملبالأيديوالأقدام. وإنّ الله سبحانه ي
ُ دخل بصدق النيّة والسريرة الصالحة من يشاء من عباده الجنّة. ُ ي ام ليبَ ق
نم هّنأل هيف رجأ ال ضرملا ّنإ مالسلا هيلع قدص لوقأو ستحقّ عليه العِوض لأنّ
العوض يستحقّ على ما كان في مقابلة فعل الله تعالى بالعبد من الآلام
والأمراض وما يجري مجرى ذلك. والأجر والثواب ي ُ ستحَقّان على ما كان في
مقابلة فعل العبد. فبينهما فرق قد بيّنه عليه السلام كما يقتضيه علمه الثاقب
ورأيه الصائب. 3.37وقال عليه السلام في ذ كر خَبّاب بن الأَرَت ّ رحمه الله
ذنملىبوط.اًدهاجمشاعواًعئاطرجاهواً بغارملسأدقلفاًباّبخهللامحري كرالمعادوعمل
.هللا نع يضرو فافَكـلاب عـِنَ قو باسحلل 3.38ام ينضغبُ ي نأ ىلع اذه يفيسب
نمؤملا موشيَخ ُتبرض ول :مالسلا هيلع لاقو أبغضني ولو صببت الدنيا بجَمّاتها
على المنافق على أن يحبّني ما أحبّني وذلك أنّه ق ُ ضي فٱنقضى على لسان النبيّ
الأمّيّ أنّه قال ⟩لا يبغضك مؤمن ولا يحبّك منافق⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 691 3.36 ʿAlī said to an associate who had been taken ill:1
May it please God to make your suffering decrease your burden of sin!
Illness, while it does not earn you reward, decreases your sins, making
them fall off like leaves in the Fall. Reward, on the other hand, is
earned through words spo- ken by tongues, and actions performed by hands
and feet. Nevertheless, God willingly admits into paradise all his
servants who possess true intentions and pious hearts.
Raḍī:ʿAlīisabsolutelycorrectwhenhesaysthatillnessearnsnoreward,foritbelongsto
the category of things that are requited, and requital operates in cases
of God's actions toward his servant, such as suffering, illness, and
their like. Reward and recompense, on the other hand, operate in cases
of God's servant's actions. There is clearly a differ- ence between the
two categories, which ʿAlī explains with penetrating knowledge and
precise judgment. 3.37 ʿAlī prayed for Khabbāb ibn al-Aratt:2 May God
have mercy on Khabbāb! He accepted Islam with joy, emigrated in
obedience to his Lord, and lived his life fighting for the truth.
Blessed is he who contemplates the return to God, does good in
anticipation of judgment, con- tents himself with basic rations, and
accepts God's will. 3.38 Were I to strike a believer on the bridge of
his nose with my sword, an action that should cause him to hate me, he
will not hate me. Were I to shower theriches of the
worldonahypocrite,anactionthatshouldprompthimtolove me, he will not love
me. This is because it was proclaimed, and thus decreed, on the tongue
of our Meccan Prophet, who said, ⟨No believer will hate you, ʿAlī, and
no hypocrite will love you⟩.3 1
In37/657,onthereturnfromṢiffīn,withinviewof
Kufa.Theaddresseewasanoldmannamed Ṣāliḥibn Sulaymfromthetribeof
SalāmānibnṬayy,afollowerof ʿAlī,whoapologizedthat his illness had kept
him from accompanying ʿAlī to battle---note the last line comforting
Ṣāliḥ, reassuring him that his good intention had earned him
paradise.Text and context in Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 528--529. 2 Also in
37/657, on the return from Ṣiffīn, just outside Kufa. ʿAlī enquired
about the graves he saw there and was told that one was the grave of
Khabbāb, a venerable Companion of the Prophet and ʿAlī's supporter, who
had died after ʿAlī left for Ṣiffīn. Text and context in Min- qarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 530--531; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:61--62. ʿAlī's address to the
people of those graves in §3.119. 3 From an oration in Kufa, after the
Battle of Nahrawān, around 39--40/659--661, attempting to mobilize the
Kufans to fight Muʿāwiyah. Text and context in Ḥ2:195--196 (within their
com- mentary on §1.34 of presentvolume;see mynotethere). "The Meccan
Prophet," lit. "the ummī Prophet," see note at §1.151.2. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 692 Text and
Translation 3.39وقال عليه السلام: سيّئة تسوءك خير عند الله من حسنة تعجبك.
3.40وقالعليهالسلام:قدرالرجلعلىقدرهمّتهوصدقهعلىقدرمُروّتهوشجاعتهعلى قدر أَن َ
.هتريَ غ ردق ىلع هتّفِعو هتف 3.41وقال عليه السلام: الظفر بالحزم والحزم
بإجالة الرأي والرأي بتحصين الأسرار. 3.42وقال عليه السلام: احذروا صَولة
الـكريم إذا جاعَواللئيم إذا شَبِـع. 3.43وقال عليه السلام: قلوب الرجال وحشيّة
فمن تأل ّ فها أقبلت عليه. 3.44.ك ُ ّدَج كدعسأ ام روتسم كبيع :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو 3.45وقال عليه السلام: أَولى الناس بالعفو أقدرهم على العقوبة. 3.46.م
ُ ّمذتو ءايحف ةلأسم نع ناك ام اّمأفًءادتبٱ ناك ام ءاخسلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.47وقال عليه السلام: لا غنى كالعقل ولا فقر كالجهل ولا ميراث كالأدب ولا
ظهير كالم ُ شاورة. 3.48وقال عليه السلام: الصبر صبران صبرٌعلى ما ت َ كر َ
ه وصبر عمّا تحب ّ . 3.49وقال عليه السلام: الغنى في الغُربة وطن والفقر في
الوطن غربة. 3.50وقال عليه السلام: القناعة مال لا يَنفَد. 3.51وقال عليه
السلام: المال مادّة الشهوات. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 693
3.39 A shameful act about which you are sorry is better in God's eyes
than a virtuous act of which you are proud. 3.40 The measure of a man is
in accord with the measure of his resolution, the measure of his
truthfulness is in accord with the measure of his chivalry, the measure
of his valor is in accord with the measure of his self-respect, and the
measure of his chastity is in accord with the measure of his jealous
sense of honor. 3.41 Victory is reached through resolution, resolution
is reached through re- flection, and reflection is reached through
guarding your secrets. 3.42 Beware the peer's attack when he's hungry,
and the churl's when he's sated. 3.43 Men's hearts are wild beasts, but
they soften toward those they love. 3.44 Your flaws will remain
concealed as long as your luck holds. 3.45 Those who hold the most power
to punish should be the foremost in for- giving. 3.46 True generosity is
spontaneous. Giving when solicited is merely to avoid shame and blame.
3.47 There is no wealth like intelligence, no poverty like ignorance, no
bequest like refinement, and no shield like consultation. 3.48 Patience
is of two kinds: patience in the face of adversity and patience in the
absence of privilege. 3.49 The rich man is at home in a foreign land,
the pauper is a stranger in his hometown. 3.50 Contentment is wealth
that never runs out. 3.51 Wealth fuels passions. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 694 Text
and Translation 3.52وقال عليه السلام: من حذّرك كمن بش ّ رك. 3.53وقال عليه
السلام: اللسان سَب ُ عٌ إن خُل ّ ي عنه عَقر. 3.54.ةبسَ ّللا ةولُح برقع ةأرملا
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.55وقال عليه السلام: الشفيع جناح الطالب. 3.56وقال
عليه السلام: أهل الدنيا كر َ كب ي ُ .مايِ ن مهو مهب راس 3.57وقال عليه
السلام: ف َ قدُالأحبّة غُربة. 3.58وقال عليه السلام: فوت الحاجة أهون من
طلبها إلى غير أهلها. 3.59وقال عليه السلام: لا تستحيِ من إعطاء القليل فإنّ
الحرمان أقلّ منه. 3.60وقال عليه السلام: العَفاف زينة الفقر. 3.61.تنك فيك
لَبُ ت الف ديرت ام نكي مل اذإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.62وقال عليه السلام: لا
ترى الجاهل إلّا مُفرِطًا أو مُفرِّطًا. 3.63وقال عليه السلام: إذا تَمّالعقل نقص
الكلام. 3.64وقال عليه السلام: الدهر يُخل ِ دعابيو ةّينَ ملا بّرقيو لامآلا
دِّدجُيو نادبألا ق الأُمنيّة من ظفر به ن َ صِب ومن فات َ ه ت َ عِب. 3.65وقال
عليه السلام: من نصب نفسه للناس إمامًا فعليه أن يبدأ بتعليم نفسه قبل تعليم
غيره وليكن تأديبه بسيرته قبل تأديبه بلسانه ومُعلِّم نفسه ومؤدّبها أحقّ
بالإجلال من معلّم الناس ومؤدّبهم. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 695
3.52 One who brings dire warnings is like one who gives glad tidings.
3.53 The tongue is a wild beast---let loose, it attacks.1 3.54 A woman
is a scorpion with a sweet sting. 3.55 The intercessor is the
suppliant's wing. 3.56 People in this world are a company of travelers
who are carried along while they sleep. 3.57 Living without loved ones
is like living in a strange land. 3.58 Not getting what you want is
better than asking those you shouldn't. 3.59 Don't be embarrassed to
give a little---not giving is even less. 3.60 Temperance adorns
poverty.2 3.61 If what you wanted didn't happen, don't bewail your
lot---in fact, don't bewail anything at all! 3.62 An ignoramus is either
stingy or extravagant. 3.63 Where intelligence abounds, words are few.
3.64 Timewearsoutbodies,renewshopes,drawsdeathclose,andmakesgoals
distant. It wearies those who win a share and grieves those who don't.
3.65 A man who would lead should teach himself before teaching others,
he should discipline with his behavior ahead of his tongue---a man who
teaches and disciplines himself is worthier of reverence than a man who
teaches and disciplines others. 1 From ʿAlī's counsel to Muḥammad ibn
al-Ḥanafiyyah. Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ, 229. 2 From ʿAlī's oration titled
Wasīlah (Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 90). This saying is similar to the first half
of §3.325. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 696 Text and
Translation 3.66وقال عليه السلام: نفَس المرء خُطاه إلى أجله. 3.67تآ ٍعَ
ّقوتم ّلكو ٍضَقنُم دودعم ّلك :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ٍ . 3.68.اهلّوأب اهرِخآ ربُ
تعٱ تهبَ تشٱ اذإ رومألا ّنإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.69ومن خبر ضِرار بن ضَمرة
الضِّبابيّ عند دخوله على معاوية ومسألته عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام. قال
فأشهد لقد رأيته في بعض مواقفه وقد أرخى الليل سُدوله وهو قائم في محرابه ُ
ملمت لملمتَ ي هتيح ِل ىلع ضباق لوقيو نيزحلا ءاكب يكبيو ميل َ ّسلا ل
يادنيايادنياإليكعنّيأبيتعرّضت ِ أمإليّتشوّفت١لاحانَحَين ُ كهَيهات َ غُرّيغيري لا
حاجة لي فيك قد طلّقتك ثلاثًا لا رجعة فيها فعيشك قصير وخطَرك يسير وأملك
حقير. آهِمن قل ّ .دِروَ ملا ميظعو رفسلا دعبو قيرطلا لوطو دازلا ة 3.70ردقو
هللا نم ءاضقب ماشلا ىلإ هريسم ناكأ هلأس اّ مل ّيماشلل مالسلا هيلع هل مالك
نمو بعد كلام طويل هذا مختاره وَيح َ ك لعلّك ظننت قضاء لازمًا وق َ باقعلاو
باوثلا لطبل كلذك ناك ولو .اً متاح اًرَد وسقط الوعد والوعيد. إنّ الله سبحانه
أمر عباده تخييرًا ونهاهم تحذيرًا وكلّف يسيرًا صعُ ي ملو .اًريثك ليلقلا ىلع
ىطعأو اًريسع فّلكي ملو َ مغلوبًا ولم ي ُ طَع مكرِهًا ولم يرسل ضْرَأْلٱَو﴿ تاوامسلا
قلخ الو اً ثبع دابعلل بتكـلا لزني ملو اً بِعَ ل ءايبنألا ُ هَنْيَ ب اَمَو َ مَا
بَاطِل ً ا ذَٰل ِ ُ رَفَك َنيِذَ ّ لٱ ُ ّنَظ َك وْا ف َ ُ رَفَك َنيِذَ ّلِّل ٌلْيَو .﴾ِراَ
ّنلٱ َنِم اْو ١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ن:كذا.وأصلش،ن،ونسخةفيم،ھ: ⟩تشوّقت⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 697
3.66 Each breath is another step toward death. 3.67 Everything you can
tally will run out. Everything you can anticipate will happen. 3.68 When
affairs grow murky, predicate endings on beginnings.1 3.69 From a report
relating Ḍirār ibn Ḍamrah al-Ḍibābī's visit to Muʿāwiyah, who asked him
to describe the Commander of the Faithful. Ḍirār declared: I testify
that I saw ʿAlī as he prayed when night had lowered its curtain.
Standing in his prayer niche, hand upon his beard, writhing as though
bitten by a snake and weeping grievously, he exclaimed:2 World, O world,
get away from me! Is it me you try to tempt, is it for me you adorn
yourself? May your time never arrive, go deceive another, for I have no
need of you---I have divorced you thrice and there can be no
reversal!3Your life is short, your worth is little, all hopes placed in
you are of no consequence. Alas, how scarce my provisions, how long the
road, how distant the journey, and how momentous the arrival at the
watering hole! 3.70 From ʿAlī's words to the Syrian who asked whether
the march on Syria was decreed by God. ʿAlī gave a lengthy answer from
which the following is a selection:4 Woe! Perhaps you think destiny is
final and fate absolute! If that were the case, God's reward and
punishment would be invalid, and God's promise and threat would have no
meaning. God has commanded his servants to do certain things, while
giving them free choice, and forbidden them from doing other things,
while giving them fair warning. He has imposed on them easy, not harsh
tasks, and has promisedgreatrewardsfor small efforts.When he is
disobeyed,it is not because he is overpowered.When he is obeyed, it is
not because he coerced. He has not sent prophets in play, or revealed
scriptures on a whim, or created the skies «and the earth in vain. That
is the claim of those who do not believe--- woe and hellfire to
unbelievers!»5 1 From ʿAlī's oration on the last night of fighting, The
Night of Clamor, at the Battle of Ṣiffīn in 37/657. Minqarī, Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 476. 2 Presumably in Kufa, during the final years of his
caliphate, around 39--40/660--661. 3 In most schools of Islamic law, a
man is permitted to remarry his divorced wife up to a total of three
times. 4 According to Ṣadūq (Tawḥīd, 380), the man who asked the
question was not a Syrian, but one of ʿAlī's Iraqi followers. 5 Qurʾan,
Ṣād 38:27. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 698 Text and
Translation 3.71وقال عليه السلام: خذ الحكمة أَن ّٰ ى١ كانت فإنّ الحكمة تكون
في صدر المنافق َ لَ تف جل َ جُ في صدره حتّى تَخرج فتسكن إلى صواحبها في صدر
المؤمن. وقال عليه السلام في مثل ذلك الحكمة ضال ّ ة المؤمن فخذ الحكمة ولو
من أهل النفاق. 3.72وقال عليه السلام: قيمةكلّ ٱمرئ ما يحسن.٢ وهذه الكلمة
التي لا تصاب لها قيمة ولا توزن بها حكمة ولا تقرن إليها كلمة. 3.73وقال
عليه السلام: أوصيكم بخمس لو ضربتم إليها آباط الإبل لكانت لذلك أهل ً ا َ
ي الو هبنذ اّلإ ّنفاخَي الو هَ ّبر اّلإ مكنم دحأ ّنَوُجرَ ي ال ستحيِي َ نّ أحد
إذا سُئل عمّا لا يعلم نم ربصلا ّنإف ٣ربصلابو همّ لعتي نأ ءيشلا ملعي مل اذإ
دحأ ّنييحتسي الو ملعأ ال لوقي نأ الإيمان كالرأس من الجسد لا خير في جسد
لا رأس معه ولا في إيمان لا صبر معه. 3.74وقال عليه السلام لرجل أفرط في
الثناء عليه وكان له مُتّه ِ مًا أنا دون ما تقول وفوق ما في نفسك. 3.75وقال
عليه السلام: بقيّة السيف أبقى عددًا وأكثر ولدًا. 3.76وقال عليه السلام: من
ترك قول لا أدري أصيبت مَقاتله. 3.77وقال عليه السلام: رأي الشيخ أحب ّ إليّ
من جَل َ د الغلام. ١ن، ش، ي، ھ: كذا. م، ونسخة في ش: ⟩أين⟨. ٢ن، ي، ھ، ش:
كذا. م، ونسخة في ش: ⟩يحسنه⟨. ٣ن، ش، م، ھ: كذا. ي، وفي هامش ھ: أضيفت
قبلها ⟩عليكم⟨. مصحّحة في ش: أضيفتقبلها ⟩عليك⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 699 3.71 Seize wisdom wherever you find it. A wise maxim may
reside in the breast of a hypocrite, and it quivers and trembles there
until it settles next to its kin, in the breast of a believer. ʿAlī also
said in a similar vein: Believers, wisdom is your own lost camel---seize
it, then, even from hypocrites! 3.72 The measure of a man is the good he
does.1 Raḍī: This maxim is priceless. No adage can be equated with it,
no maxim can be com- pared to it. 3.73 I counsel you to five traits so
precious it is only right that you should whip your camels to reach
them: Place your hopes in no one save your Lord. Fear nothing save your
sins. When asked about something you don't know, don't be ashamed to
say, "I don't know." If you don't know something, don't be ashamed to
learn. And be patient in adversity, for patience is to faith as the head
is to the body---what good is a body without a head, or faith without
patience?2 3.74 ʿAlī said to a secret calumniator who praised him
effusively to his face:3 I am less than you say but more than you think.
3.75 Survivors of the sword multiply in number and their descendants
prolif- erate.4 3.76 The moment you stop saying, "I don't know," you
will be struck the death- blow. 3.77 An elder's advice is worth more to
me than a youth's muscle.5 1 Listed among ʿAlī's "signature replies"
(tawqīʿāt), inscribed on the letter to his associate Ṣaʿṣaʿah ibn Ṣūḥān
(Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:288). The line could also be translated as,
"The measure of a man is what he does well"---i.e., does well in terms
of professional skill (B 954), or knowledge and worship (F 408). 2 Part
of a sermon in the mosque (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 154--157), presumably in
Kufa; other parts are §3.81, §3.100. 3 The calumniator was al-Ashʿath
ibn Qays, and the exchange presumably happened in Kufa during ʿAlī's
caliphate, 35--40/656--661. Abū ʿUbayd al-Bakrī, Faṣl al-Maqāl, 33. 4
Among ʿAlī's signature replies (tawqīʿāt), inscribed on his letter to
his associate Ḥuṣayn (or Ḥuḍayn) ibn al-Mundhir. Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd,
4:288. 5 Among ʿAlī's "signature replies" (tawqīʿāt), inscribed on his
letter to his son Ḥasan. Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:288. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 700 Text and
Translation وروي ⟩من مشهد الغلام⟨. 3.78وقال عليه السلام: عجبت لمن ي َ قن
َ ط ومعه الاستغفار. 3.79وحكى عنه أبو جعفر محمّد بن عليّالباقر عليهم السلام
أنّه قال َ نوُدفامهدحأعفُ رفهناحبسهللاباذعنمنانامأضرألايفناك
كمالآخَرفتمسّكوابه. أمّا الأمان الذي رفع فهو رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله. وأمّا الأمان الباقي فالاستغفار ُ يِ لُ هللٱ َناَك اَمَو﴿ لئاق نم ّزع
هللا لاق عَذِّبَه ُ مْ وَأَنت َ فِيه ِ مْ وَمَا كَانَ ٱلله ُمُعَذِّبَه ُ مْ وَهُمْ ي َ سْت َ
غْفِر ُ ونَ﴾. وهذا من محاسن الاستخراج ولطائف الاستنباط.
3.80وقالعليهالسلام:منأصلحمابينهوبيناللهأصلحاللهمابينهوبينالناسومن أصلح
أمر آخرته أصلح الله له أمر دنياه ومن كان له من نفسه واعظ كان عليه من
الله حافظ. 3.81ُ ي مل نم هيقفلا ُ ّلكهيقفلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو قنط الناس
من رحمة الله ولم يؤيسهم من رَوح الله ولم يؤمنهم من مكر الله. 3.82وقال
عليه السلام: أوضعُ العلم ما وقف على اللسان وأرفعه ما ظهر في الجوارح
والأركان. 3.83َ مَ تبولقلاهذه ّنإ:مالسلاهيلعلاقو لّ كماتملّ
الأبدانفٱبتغوالهاطرائفالحكمة. 3.84وقال عليه السلام: لا يقولنّ أحد كم
ٱللّٰهم إن ّ ي أعوذ بك من الفتنة لأنّه ليس أحد إلّا وهو مشتمل على فتنة ولـكن
من ٱستعاذ فليستعذ من مُضِلّات الفتن فإنّ الله ُ مَ لْعٱَو﴿لوقيهناحبس َ مَ ّنَأْآو
آ أَمْوَالـ ُ كُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْفِتْن َ ةٌ﴾.ومعنىذلكأنّهسبحانهيختبرهم al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 701
Raḍī: The saying is also narrated as "a youth's martyrdom." 3.78 I
marvel at one who despairs when he could ask forgiveness! 3.79 Abū
Jaʿfar Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī, al-Bāqir, reported these words by ʿAlī: Of the
two refuges from God's punishment, one is taken away, but the other
remains---so hold fast! The refuge that is taken away is God's
Messenger, the one that remains is repentance---the Almighty said to the
Prophet, «God will not punish them while you are among them, and he will
not punish them if they repent.»1 Raḍī:This is one of the most beautiful
of interpretations and the most sublime of infer- ences. 3.80 Whoever
puts right what is between him and God, God puts right what is between
him and others. Whoever puts right affairs of the hereafter, God puts
right for him affairs of the world. Whoever has himself as counsellor
has God as protector. 3.81 A true sage teaches people never to despair
of God's mercy, and never to lose hope in God's compassion, yet, at the
same time, never to stop fearing God's retribution.2 3.82 The lowest
form of knowledge stops at the tongue. The highest form of knowledge
manifests in limbs and appendages. 3.83 Minds tire just as bodies tire,
so seek for them wondrous novelties of wis- dom!3 3.84 Never say, "God,
protect me from trial!" for no one is free from exposure to trial. If
you wish to seek God's protection, seek it against the inducements to
stray that occur during times of trial. God has said, «Know that the
riches you own and the children you beget are nothing but trials!»4 This
means that the Almighty tests people through wealth and children to see
who is unhappy with his lot and who accepts his share with equanimity.
The Almighty knows what 1 Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:33. 2 Part of a sermon in the
mosque (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 154--157), presumably in Kufa; other parts are
§3.73, §3.100. 3 Nearly identical to §3.181. 4 Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:28.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 702 Text and
Translation بالأموال والأولاد ليتبي ّ ن الساخط لرزقه والراضي بقِسمه وإن
كان سبحانه أعلم بهم من أنفسهم ولـكن لتظهر الأفعال التي بها ي ُ ستحَقّ
الثواب والعقاب لأنّ بعضهم يحب ّ بحي مهضعبو ثانإلا هركيو روكُ ّذلا ّ تثمير
المال ويكره ٱنثلام الحال. وهذا من غريب ما سمع منه عليه السلام في
التفسير. 3.85وسئل عليه السلام عن الخـير ما هو فقال ليس الخـير أن يكثر
مالك وولدك ولـكنّ الخـير أن يكثر علمك وأن يعظم حلمك وأن
تنسحأنإفكّبرةدابعبسانلايهابُ ت َ حمدت َ اللهوإنأسأتٱستغفرتالله.ولاخير في
الدنيا إلّا لرجلين رجل أذنب ذنوبًا فهو يتداركها بالتوبة ورجل يسارع في
الخـيرات. ولا يقلّ عمل مع التقوى وكيف ي َ .لَ ّبقتُ ي ام ّلق
3.86وقالعليهالسلام:إنّ أَولىالناسبالأنبياءأعلمهمبماجاءوابهثمّتلىعليهالسلام
َ لْوَأ َ ّن ِإ﴿ َ بـَ ّتا َنيِذَ ّ لـَ لَ ميِهاَرْب ِإِب ِساَ ّنلا ى عُوهُوَهَٰ ُ مْلا ُ
ّيِلَوُ هَ ّللاَو اوُ نَمآ َنيِذَ ّ لاَو ُ ّيِبَ ّنلا اَذ ؤْمِنِينَ﴾ثم ىصع نم دّمحم ّودع
ّنإو هتَ مْحُل تدعب نإو هللا عاطأ نم دّمحم ّيلو ّنإ مالسلا هيلع لاق الله وإن
قربت قرابته. 3.87وقال عليه السلام: وقد سمع رجل ً أرقيو دّجهتي ةّيرورَ حلا
نم ا نوم على يقين خير من صلاة في شكّ . 3.88وقال عليه السلام: اِعقِلوا
الخـبر إذا سمعتموه عقل رعاية لا عقل رواية فإنّ رواة العلم كثير ورعاته
قليل. 3.89وقال عليه السلام: وقد سمع رجل ً ﴾َنْوُعِجاَرِهْيـَ ل ِإ ٓاَ ّن ِإَوِهّٰلِ ل
اَ ّن ِإ﴿ لوقي ا al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 703
is in their hearts more than they do, but the trials prompt them to
actions by which they earn either reward or punishment. Some prefer male
children and dislike girls. Others are obsessed with amassing wealth and
lose patience when their robes fray. Raḍī: This is among the wondrous
commentaries on the Qurʾan heard from ʿAlī. 3.85 ʿAlī was asked, "What
constitutes distinction?" and he replied: Possessing great wealth and
having many children are not marks of distinc- tion---distinction is
obtained through vast knowledge and abundant kindness,
andbyvyingtoworshiptheLord.If youdogood,praiseGod,if youdoill,beghis
forgiveness. Distinction in this world is reserved for two kinds of men:
one who commits a sin but atones for it by repenting, and one who
hastens to perform good deeds. No deed is too small if performed with
piety---how can something that God accepts ever be small? 3.86 ʿAlī
said: Closest to prophets are those who discern their message best. Then
he recited, «Closest to Abraham are those who followed him, as is this
Prophet, and those who profess belief---God is close to believers.»1
Then he continued: One who obeys God is Muḥammad's kinsman, however
distant he may be in bloodline. One who disobeys God is Muḥammad's
enemy, however close he may be in kinship. 3.87 ʿAlī heard a Ḥarūrī
Kharijite praying late in the night and reciting the Qurʾan, and he
said:2 Sleep accompanied by certainty is better than prayer accompanied
by doubt. 3.88 Study any hadith you hear with mindful attention, not by
rote learning.3 Narrators of knowledge are many, its true custodians
few. 3.89 ʿAlī heard a man intone, «To God we belong and to him we shall
return!» and he said:4 1 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:68. 2 Presumably in Kufa,
soon after the Kharijites' secession in 37/658. The Ḥarūriyyah were the
first Kharijites---Ḥarūrāʾ was the place near Kufa where they initially
gathered to protest against ʿAlī. 3 Ar. khabar, lit. "report,"
translated here as "hadith." The last lines of §1.236 are similar. 4
Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:156.The man is al-Ashʿath ibn Qays, to whom ʿAlī was
offering condolences at the death of his brother, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān
(Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 209). See also ʿAlī's condolence to Ashʿath on his
son's death in §3.277, and for an unnamed relative in §3.385. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 704 Text and
Translation انسفنأىلعرارقإ﴾نْوُعِجاَرِهْيـَ ل ِإ ٓاَ ّن ِإَو﴿انلوقو.كلُ
ملابانسفنأىلعرارقإ﴾ِهّٰلِ لاَ ّن ِإ﴿انلوق ّنإ .كلُ هلاب 3.90وقال عليه السلام
وقد مدحه قوم في وجهه اللّٰهمّ إنّك أعلم بي من نفسي وأنا أعلم بنفسي منهم
اللّٰهمّ ٱجعلنا خيرًا ممّا يظنّون وٱغفر لنا ما لا يعلمون. 3.91وقال عليه
السلام: لا يستقيم قضاء الحوائج إلّا بثلاث بٱستصغارها لتعظم وبٱستكتامها
لتظهر وبتعجيلها لتهنأ. 3.92وقال عليه السلام: يأتي على الناس زمان لا ي ُ
ُ ي الو لحاملا اّلإ هيف بَ ّرق فَ ّرَظ فيه إلّا الفاجر ولا يضعّف فيه إلّا
المنصف. ي َ اً ّنَم محرلا ةلصو اًمرُغ هيف ةقدصلا نوّدُع والعبادة ٱستطالة على
الناس. فعند ذلك يكون السلطان بمشورة الإماء وإمارة الصبيان وتدبير
الخصيان.١ 3.93ورُؤي عليه إزارٌخَل ِ ق مرقوع فقيل له في ذلك فقال يخشع له
القلب وتذلّ به النفس ويقتدي به المؤمنون. 3.94وقال عليه السلام: إنّ الدنيا
والآخرة عدوّان متفاوتان وسبيلان مختلفان فمن أحب ّ الدنيا وتوّلاها أبغض
الآخرة وعاداها وهما بمنزلة المشرق والمغرب وماشٍ بينهما كلّما قرب من واحد
بعد من الآخر وهما بعدُضَرّتان. 3.95هشارف نم جرخ دقو ةليل تاذ مالسلا هيلع
نينمؤملا ريمأ تيأر لاق ّيلاكِبلا فوَ ن نعو فنظر إلى النجوم فقال يا نوف
أراقد أنت أم رامق قلت بل رامق يا أمير المؤمنين فقال
١ن،ش،ي،ھ،وأضيفتفيم:كذا.أصلم:سقطت ⟩وتدبيرالخصيان⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 705 When we say, «To God we belong,» we acknowledge our
subjugation.When we say, «To him we shall return,» we acknowledge our
mortality. 3.90 Lord, you know me better than I know myself, and I know
myself bet- ter than others know me. Lord, make me more virtuous than
they think, and forgive those of my actions they don't know.1 3.91 Your
benefaction becomes perfect only when you add three more actions: when
you deem your favors small, they become great, when you conceal them,
they become clear, and when you expedite them, they are received with
joy. 3.92 An age is coming to the world in which none but the schemer
will be granted intimacy, none but the debauched will be considered
witty, and none but the just will be deemed weak. People will regard
charity a tax, gifts to rel- atives a favor, and God's worship a means
to self-glorification. At that time, power will be wielded through the
counsel of concubines, the command of boys, and the governance of
eunuchs. 3.93
ʿAlīwasseenwearingawornandpatchedgarment,andwhensomeoneremarked on this,
he explained: The heart bows to him and the soul prostrates before
him---true believers will follow my practice. 3.94 This world and the
hereafter are mutual enemies and divergent paths--- to love and follow
this world is to hate and reject the hereafter. The two are like East
and West for the person who walks between them---the nearer he draws to
one, the further he moves from the other. They are like two wives
married to one man. 3.95 Nawf al-Bikālī narrated this report, and he
said: I saw the Commander of the Faithful one night as he rose from his
bed, gazed at the stars, then said to me, "Nawf, are you asleep or
awake?" "I'm awake, Commander of the Faithful," I replied. ʿAlī then
said to me:2 1 Presumably in Kufa during ʿAlī's caliphate,
35--40/656--661. Response when he was praised to his face (Māmaṭīrī,
Nuzhah, 243--244). Similar final line in §1.191.3 (see note on context
there). 2 Presumably in Kufa during ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661.
The words in parentheses within ʿAlī's text are Raḍī's explanatory
insertions. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 706 Text and
Translation يا نوف طوبى للزاهدين في الدنيا الراغبين في الآخرة أولئك قوم
ٱتّخذوا الأرض بساطًا جاهنمىلعاًضرقايندلااوضرقّمثاًراثدءاعدلاواًراعشنآرقلاواً
بيطاهءامواًشارفاهبارتو المسيح.يانوفإنّ
داودعليهالسلامقامفيمثلهذهالساعةمنالليلفقال ⟩إنّهاساعة لا يدعو فيها عبد
إلّا ٱستجيب له إلّا أن يكون عَشّارًا أو عَريفًا أو ش ُ بحاص وأ اً ّيطر .⟨(لب َ
ّطلا يهو) ةبوك بحاص وأ (روبن ُ ّطلا يهو) ةبطرَع وقد قيل أيضًا إنّ العرطبة
الطبل والـكوبة الطنبور. 3.96وقالعليهالسلام:إنّ اللهٱفترضعليكمالفرائضفلات
ُ ضيّعوهاوحدّ لـكمحدودًا
فلاتعتدّوهاونهاكمعنأشياءفلاتنتهكوهاوسكتلـكمعنأشياءولميدعهانسيانًافلا
تتكلّفوها. 3.97هللاحتفاّلإمهايندحالصتسٱلمهنيدنماً
ئيشسانلاكرتيال:مالسلاهيلعلاقو عليهم ما هو أضرّمنه. 3.98وقال عليه السلام:
رُب .هعفني ال هعم هملعو هلهج هلتق ملاع َ ّ 3.99ِّلُ ع دقل :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
ق بنِياط هذا الإنسان ب َ ضعة هي أعجب ما فيه وذلك القلب وله مَوادٌّمن الحكمة
وأضداد من خلافها. فإن سَنح له الرجاء أذل ّ ه الطمع وإن هاج به الطمع
أهلـكه الحرص وإن ملـكه اليأس قتله الأسف وإن عَرض له الغضب ّ
تٱنإورذحلاهلغشفوخلا١هَ لاعنإوظّفحتلايسنىضرلاهدعسأنإوظيَغلاهب ّدتشٱ سع
لهالأمنٱستلبتهالغرّة٢وإنأصابتهمصيبةفضحهالجزعوإنأفادمالًاأطغاهالغنىوإن عضّته
الفاقة شغله البلاء وإن جَهده الجوع قعد به الضعف وإن أفرط به الشِّب َ ع كظّته
البِطنة. فكلّ تقصير به مُضِرّوكلّ إفراط له مفسد. ١م، ي، ونسخة في ش، ن: كذا.
أصل ش، ن، ونسخة في م: ⟩ناله⟨. ھ، ونسخة في ي: ⟩غاله⟨. ٢م،ي:كذا.ش،ن،ھ:
⟩عزّة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 707
Nawf, blessed are those who reject worldliness and focus their desire on
the hereafter! They take God's earth for a carpet, its dust for a bed,
its water for perfume, the Qurʾan as their garment, and prayer as their
robe. They cut their bonds with the world as the Messiah did. Nawf, the
Prophet David stepped out- side at just such an hour, and said, ⟨This is
an hour when the prayer of any who prays will be answered, unless he is
a tax collector, an appraiser, an enforcer, an oud player (that is, a
lute player), or a percussionist (that is, a drummer).⟩ Raḍī:
Alternatively, it is said that ʿarṭabah, the first word of the last
pair, means drum, and kūbah, the second word, means lute. 3.96 God has
mandated certain things for you---don't squander them. He has laid down
certain limits for you---don't transgress them. He has forbidden you
certain actions---don't violate them. He has stayed silent about certain
things deliberately and not because he had forgotten---don't burden
yourself with them.1 3.97 When people forego a religious duty to rally
their worldly affairs, God opens for them a door that leads to more
harm. 3.98 A learned man is sometimes killed by ignorance, and his
learning fails to come to his aid.2 3.99 There is a piece of flesh
attached to the jugular vein that is the human's most wondrous
organ---the heart. It has elements of wisdom, and others that are quite
the opposite. If it is lifted by hope, ambition debases it, and if ambi-
tionboilsover,greeddestroysit,butif
disappointmenttakeshold,regretkillsit. If aggravated, its rage runs
rampant, but if made happy, it forgets to be circum- spect. If
overwhelmed by fear, caution preoccupies it, but if safety is secured,
heedlessness strips it away, and if calamity strikes, it panics. If it
gains prop- erty, wealth makes it a tyrant, but if poverty bites,
distress preoccupies it. If hunger enfeebles it, weakness prevents it
from rising, but if satiety is exces- sive, surfeit oppresses it. Every
deficiency does it harm, and every excess injures it.3 1 Hārūnī (Taysīr,
272) cites this excerpt as part of §1.50, an oration ʿAlī delivered in
Medina six days after he became caliph, in 35/656. 2 The line---which
refers to Ṭalḥah and Zubayr---is from ʿAlī's oration in Medina in
36/656, when news arrived that the two had set out for Basra with
ʿĀʾishah to raise an army against him. Ḥ1:233 (in commentary on §1.8),
after Abū Mikhnaf, Jamal. 3 From an aphoristic oration titled Wasīlah
(Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 92--100). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 708 Text and
Translation 3.100.يلاغلا عجري اهيلإو يلاتلا قحلي اهب ىطسولا ةقُ رمُ ّ نلا
نحن :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.101وقال عليه السلام: لا يقيم أمر الله سبحانه إلّا
من لا يصانع ولا يضارع ولا يتبع الم َ طامع. 3.102وقال عليه السلام وقد توف
ّ ي س َ هل بن حُنيف الأنصاري ّ رحمه الله بالـكوفة مَرجِعَه معه من صفّين وكان
من أحب ّ الناس إليه َ فاهَتَ ل ٌلبج ينّبحأ ول ت. ومعنى ذلك أنّ المحنة تغلظ
عليه فتسرع المصائب إليه ولا ي ُ فعَل ذلك إلّا بالأتقياء الأبرار والمصطفين
الأخيار. وهذا مثل قوله عليه السلام مَن أحبّنا أهلَ البيت فليستعدّ للفقر
جِلبابًا. ذ عضوم اذه سيل رخآ ىنعم ىلع كلذ لِّوؤُ ت دقو كره. 3.103وقال عليه
السلام: لا مال أعود من العقل ولا وحدة أوحش من العُجب ولا
عقلكالتدبيرولاكرمكالتقوىولاقرينكحسنالخلقولاميراثكالأدبولاقائد كالتوفيق
ولا تجارةكالعمل الصالح ولا رِبح كالثواب ولا ورع كالوقوف عند الشبهة
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 709
3.100 We are the saddle-pad in the middle---those who lag must catch up,
while those who exceed bounds must return to it.1 3.101 God's faith is
established only by a man who never blandishes, or suc- cumbs, or
follows the path of greed. 3.102 When Sahl ibn Ḥunayf, one of the people
ʿAlī loved dearly, died in Kufa soon after returning with him from
Ṣiffīn, he exclaimed:2 Were a mountain to love me, it would crumble!
Raḍī: The expression means that troubles bear down on such a man and
calamities rush to strike him, and that this happens only to pious
savants and virtuous saints. It resembles another saying by ʿAlī, in
which he said: Whoever loves us, the family of the Prophet, should
prepare to wear the robe of poverty. Raḍī:This saying has also been
interpreted differently, but this is not the place for those details.
3.103 There is no wealth more profitable than intelligence, no solitude
more desolate than vanity, no intelligence like prudent planning, no
honor like god- fearing piety, no companion like a beautiful character,
no legacy like mannered refinement, no leader like divine direction, no
trade like good deeds, no profit like heavenly reward, no restraint like
pausing when in doubt, no renunciation 1 "We" refers to the Prophet's
family according to all the commentators, but the enigmatic imageof the
"saddle-padinthemiddle"(al-numruqahal-wusṭā)isinterpretedvariouslyas:(1)
the true and just Imams, embodiment of the middle way between two
extremes, presumably those who deem ʿAlī the fourth caliph and those who
believe in his divinity; this explanation focuses on "in the middle,"
while "saddle-pad" is not explained (B 961; F 419); (2) the virtuous
mean between the vices, because the "saddle-pad" is placed higher than
everything else on the camel's back, and, being the place where the
rider sits, it is akin to a person's theologi- cal position (Ḥ18:273);
(3) the intermediate position of authority held by the family of the
Prophet, where the Prophet is the "greatest saddle-pad," and other
Muslim authorities are the "lesser saddle-pad" (R 3:302--303); (4)
comfort-givers, like the saddle-pad that supports and cushions the body
(ʿA 713). The text's context is also given variously as: (1) part of
ʿAlī's address to Ḥārith al-Hamdānī (ʿImād al-Dīn al-Ṭabarī, Bishārah,
21); (2) Part of a sermon in the mosque, presumably in Kufa; other parts
are §3.73, §3.81 (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 154--157, where the first line is,
"Follow the middle path," while the rest is the same as here); (3)
ʿAlī's address to a group from "the West" (presumably, Syria), in praise
of the truly pious (Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:210). 2 In 37/657 or 38/658.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 710 Text and
Translation
ولازهدكالزهدفيالحرامولاعلمكالتفكّرولاعبادةكأداءالفرائضولاإيمانكالحياء
والصبر ولا حسب كالتواضع ولا شرف كالعلم ولا مُظاهرة أوثق من مُشاورة.
3.104وقال عليه السلام: إذا ٱستولى الصلاح على الزمان وأهله ثمّأساء رجل
الظنّ برجل لم ت َ ظهر منه خِزية فقد ظلم وإذا ٱستولى الفساد على الزمان
وأهله فأحسن رجل الظنّ برجل فقد غرّر. 3.105وقيل له عليه السلام كيف تجدك يا
أمير المؤمنين فقال كيف يكون من يفنى ببقائه وي َ سقَم بصحّته ويؤتى من
مأمنه. 3.106وقال عليه السلام كم من مُستدرَج ٍ بالإحسان إليه ومغرور بالستر
عليه ومَفتون بحسن القول فيه وما ٱبتلى الله أحدًا بمثل الإملاء له.
3.107وقال عليه السلام: هلك فيّ رجلان محب ٌّ غالٍ ومبغض قالٍ. 3.108وقال عليه
السلام: إضاعة الفرصة غُص ّ ة. 3.109وقالعليه السلام:مَث َ ِّ يَ لةّيحلالثمك
ايندلال يوهي اهفوَجيفعقانلا ّمَ ّسلاواهُ ّسَم ٌن بُ ّللا وذ اهرذحيو
لهاجلاّرِغلا اهيلإ ّ العاقل. 3.110وقال عليه السلام وقد سئل عن قريش
أمّابنومخزومفريحانةقريشتحب ّ حديثرجالهموالنكاحفينسائهموأمّابنوعبدشمس
فأبعدها رأيًا وأمنعها لما وراء ظهورها وأمّا نحن فأبذل لما في أيدينا وأسمح
عند الموت بنفوسنا. وهم أكثر وأمكر وأنكر ونحن أفصح وأنصح وأصبح. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 711
like renouncing the forbidden, no knowledge like contemplation, no
worship like the mandated rites, no faith like modesty and endurance, no
lineage like humility, no nobility like knowledge, and no support surer
than consultation.1 3.104 Among a people and at a time when integrity
prevails, you are being unjust if you entertain suspicions about a man
who has never performed an act of villainy. Among a people and at a time
when corruption prevails, you are rushing into peril if you trust any
man. 3.105 ʿAlī was asked, "How do you fare, Commander of the Faithful?"
and he replied:2 How fares he who is led to death by his life, carried
to sickness by his health, and about to be attacked in his place of
safety? 3.106 ʿAlī said: How many are made complacent by continued
favors, deceived by conceal- ment of sins, and duped by people's praise!
The most severe of God's tests is time and a slack rein. 3.107 Two kinds
of men are damned because of how they feel about me: one is excessive in
his love, the other is extreme in his hatred.3 3.108 Missed
opportunities produce regret. 3.109 This world is like a snake---soft to
the touch but filled with deadly poi- son. The foolish lad reaches out
for it, but the intelligent man is wary.4 3.110 ʿAlī was asked to
describe the clans of the Quraysh, and he said: Makhzūm are the sweet
blossoms of Quraysh, you enjoy the conversation of their men and delight
in marrying their women. ʿAbd Shams are the most far- sighted and the
most valiant in protecting their own. We, Hāshim, are the most
openhanded in giving and have the biggest hearts when facing death. They
are more numerous, more cunning, and more repugnant. We are more
eloquent, more sincere, and fairer of countenance. 1 Part of an oration
ʿAlī delivered nine days after Muḥammad's death, in Medina in 11/632
(Ṣadūq, Amālī, 399). Also included in Wasīlah (Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 94). 2
The man who asked is ʿAlī's nephew ʿAbdallāh ibn Jaʿfar, who had come to
visit ʿAlī, who was ill. Ṭūsī, Amālī, 631. 3 Similar to §1.125,
addressed to the Kharijites in Kufa, 37/658. 4 Similar to §2.68, written
to Salmān al-Fārisī, who moved to Kufa in ʿUthmān's reign, and died in
Madāʾin in ca. 35/655. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 712 Text and
Translation 3.111وقال عليه السلام: شَتّانَ بين عملين عمل تذهب لذّته وتبقى تَب
ِ عته وعمل تذهب مَؤونته ويبقى أجره. 3.112وتبع جنازة فسمع رجل ً ا يضحك
فقال عليه السلام كأنّ الموت فيها على غيرنا كُتِب وكأنّ الحقّ فيها على غيرنا
وَجَب وكأنّ الذي نرى َ ن دق مهثارت لكأنو مهثادجأ مهئّوبُ ن نوعجار انيلإ ليلق
اّمعٌ رْفَس تاومألا نم سِينا كلّ واعظة ورَمَينا بكلّ جائحة. طوبى لمن ذلّ في نفسه
وطاب كسبه وصلحت سريرته وحسنت خليقته وأنفق الفضل من ماله وأمسك الفضل من
لسانه وعزل عن الناس شرّه ووسعته السنّة ولم ينسب إلى بدعة. ومن الناس من
ينسب هذا الكلام إلى رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله. 3.113.ناميإ لجرلا
ةريغو رفكةأرملا ةريَ غ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.114وقال عليه السلام: لَأَن ْ سُب
َ ميلستلا وه مالسإلا يلبق دحأ اهبُسنَ ي مل ةبسن مالسإلا ّن والتسليم هو
اليقين واليقين هو التصديق والتصديق هو الإقرار والإقرار هو الأداء والأداء
هو العمل. 3.115وقال عليه السلام: عجبت للبخيل يستعجل الفقر الذي منه هرب
ويفوته الغنى الذي إيّاه طلب فيعيش في الدنيا عيش الفقراء ويحاسَب في الآخرة
حساب الأغنياء وعجبت للمتكبّر الذي كان بالأمس نطفة ويكون غدًا جيفة وعجبت
لمن شكّ في الله وهو يرى خلق الله وعجبت لمن نسي الموت وهو يرى من يموت
وعجبت لمن أنكر النشأة الأخرى وهو يرى النشأة الأولى وعجبت لعامر دار
الفناء وتارك دار البقاء. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 713
3.111 How different these two actions! An action whose pleasure passes
but whose punishment remains, and an action whose suffering passes but
whose reward remains. 3.112 ʿAlī was following a bier in a funeral
procession when he heard a man laugh. He exclaimed: We behave as though
death were decreed for everyone other than ourselves, as though duties
were incumbent upon everyone other than ourselves, as if those who die
before our eyes are travelers who will soon return! We consign their
bodies to the grave and consume their wealth, forgetting every counselor
and shrugging off every tragedy. Blessed is he whose soul is humble,
whose earnings are pure, whose heart is sincere, whose character is
good, who shares his sur- plus wealth, who restrains his tongue from
gratuitous utterances, who spares people his evil, who finds sufficient
room within the accepted practice, and to whom no heretical innovation
can be ascribed! Raḍī: Some people attribute these words to God's
Messenger.1 3.113 Woman's jealousy is heresy, man's jealousy is faith.2
3.114 Ishalltracethepedigreeof Islamasnoonehasdonebefore:Islammeans
submission, submission means certainty, certainty means belief, belief
means acknowledgment, acknowledgment means discharge of duties, and
discharge of duties means action.3 3.115 I am amazed by the miser who
hastens to bring on himself the very poverty he flees and fails to enjoy
the very wealth he seeks---he spends his life in this world among the
destitute, yet is held to account in the hereafter with the wealthy. I
am amazed by the conceited bighead who was but yesterday a droplet of
sperm and who will tomorrow be a rotting corpse. I am amazed by one who
doubts God when he can see God's creation. I am amazed by one who
forgets death when he can see the dead. I am amazed by one who denies
the afterlife when he can observe this life. I am amazed by one who
furnishes the abode of transience and ignores the abode of eternity. 1
Within an oration the Prophet delivered "from the back of his camel"
upon his return to Med- ina from the Last Pilgrimage in 10/632. Yaʿqūbī,
Tārīkh, 2:100; Kulaynī, Kāfī, 8:168. 2 Islamic law allows a man to marry
up to four co-wives, while a woman may only marry one man at a time. B
966; R 3:315; F 421--422, citing Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:3. 3 "Submission"
(taslīm) derives from the same root ("S-L-M") as "Islam," whose lexical
purview includes submission, commitment, peace, and wellbeing. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 714 Text and
Translation 3.116يفهلل سيلنميف هلل ةجاحالو ّمهلابيلُ تبٱ لمعلا
يفرّصقنم:مالسلا هيلعلاقو نفسه وماله نصيب.
3.117هلعفكنادبألايفلعفيهّنإفهرخآيفهو َ ّقلتوهلّوأيفدربلااوَ ّقَوَ
ت:مالسلاهيلعلاقو في الأشجار أوّله يُحرق وآخره يورق. 3.118وقال عليه السلام:
عِظَمُالخالق عندك يصغّر المخلوق في عينك. 3.119وقال عليه السلام: وقد رجع من
صفّين فأشرف على القبور بظاهر الـكوفة ُ ملا روبقلاو ةرفقُ ملا ّلاحَملاو
ةشحوملا رايدلا لهأ اي ظلمة يا أهل التربة يا أهل الغربة يا أهل الوحدة يا
أهل الوحشة أنتم لنا ف َ ر َ ط تنكُس دقفَرو ُ ّدلا اّمأ قحال ٌعَبَت مكـل نحنو
قباس ٌ وأمّاالأزواجفقدنكحتوأمّاالأموالفقدقسمت.هذاخبرماعندنافماخبرماعند كم.
ثمّٱلتفت إلى أصحابه فقال أما لو أُذن لهم في الكلام لأخبرو .﴾ىَوْقَ ّتلا ِداَ
ّزلاَرْيَخ﴿ ّنأ مك 3.120وقال عليه السلام: وقد سمع رجل ً ا يذمّ الدنيا
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 715
3.116 If you fall short in deeds, you will be afflicted with anxiety.
God has no need of someone who offers him no share of his life or
wealth. 3.117 Protect yourself against the cold when the wintry weather
begins, and expose yourself to it as it ends, for its action on bodies
is the same as its action on trees: the first cold burns, while the last
prompts leaves to sprout. 3.118 The majesty of the Creator in your heart
should make his creatures insignificant in your eyes.1 3.119 When ʿAlī
reached the cemetery outside Kufa upon his return from Ṣiffīn, he
intoned:2 Opeopleof desolateabodes,ruinedquarters,anddarktombs!Opeopleof
dust, O people of exile, O people of isolation, O people of desolation!
You preceded us, and we shall follow. As for your homes---others have
occupied them. As for your wives---others have bedded them. As for your
properties---others have divided them. This is our news---what is yours?
Then he turned to his companions and said: If they were permitted to
answer, they would say, «The best provision is piety.»3 3.120 ʿAlī
retorted to a man whom he overheard criticizing this world:4 1 From
ʿAlī's Hammām Oration describing the pious, §1.191.2. 2 According to
Ḥarrānī (Tuḥaf, 186--188), this is the second part of an oration ʿAlī
delivered late inthenightimmediatelyfollowingtheBattleof
theCamel,outsideBasrain36/656,toagroup of men from his own army, of
which the first part is recorded with some variants as §3.120 (the next
text here). Alternatively, the first line is recorded by Minqarī (Waqʿat
Ṣiffīn, 531) and Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 5:61--62) as part of a longer address
ʿAlī intoned just outside Kufa in 37/657, on his return from Ṣiffīn,
when he saw the graves of his companion Khabbāb ibn al-Aratt and others;
he prayed for them (§3.37), then addressed them thus. The line could
have been used more than once by ʿAlī, and both contexts could be
correct. 3 Qurʾan, Baqarah 2:197. 4 Ḥarrānī (Tuḥaf, 186--188) says ʿAlī
delivered this oration late in the night outside Basra, imme- diately
following the Battle of the Camel in 36/656, to a group of men from
ʿAlī's own army, who were presumably blaming the world for the
inexplicable failings of Ṭalḥah, Zubayr, and ʿĀʾishah. ʿAlī reminds them
that the world is not responsible for the fate of its inhabitants. It is
followed in this source and some others by §3.119. Ibn al-ʿAsākir
(Tārīkh, 42:499) places this oration in the Grand Mosque in Kufa, in
response to a man whom ʿAlī heard chastising the world. Muwaffaq biʾllāh
(Iʿtibār, 51) narrates it from Aṣbagh ibn Nubātah, who says ʿAlī spoke
these words in response to a man who complained about the state of the
world. See further analysis of §3.119--200 in Qutbuddin, "ʿAlī's
Contemplations on this World and the Hereafter," 345--348. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 716 Text and
Translation أيّها الذامّ للدنيا أتغترّ بالدنيا١ ثمّ تذمّها أنت المتجرّم عليها
أم هي المتجرّمة عليك. متى ٱستهوتك أم متى غرّتك أبمصارع آبائك من البِلى أم
بمضاجع أمّهاتك تحت الثرى. كم علّلت بكفّيك و كم مرّضت بيديك تبغي لهم الشفاء
وتستوصف لهم الأطبّاء لم ينفع أحدهم إشفاقك ولم ت ُ ايندلا هب كل تلّثم دق
.كتّوقب هنع عفدت ملو كتبِ لَطب هيف فَعس نفسك وبمصرعه مصرعك. إنّ الدنيا دار
صدق لمن صَدَقها ودار عافية لمن فهم عنها ودار غنى لمن تزوّد منها ودار موعظة
لمن ٱتّعظ بها. مسجدُ أحبّاء الله ومُصل ّ ى ملائكة
اللهومَهبِطوحياللهومَتجَرأولياءاللهٱكتسبوافيهاالرحمةورَب ِ
حوافيهاالجنّة.فمنذايذمّها َ نو اهقارفب تدانو اهنيَ بب تَنَذآ دقو عَت ْ نفسها
وأهلها فمثّلت لهم ببلائها البلاء وشوّقتهم اًريذحتو اًفيوختو اً بيهرتو اً بيغرت
ةعيجفب تركتبٱو ةيفاعب تحار .رورسلا ىلإ اهرورسب فذمّها رجال غداة الندامة
وحمدها آخرون يوم القيامة ذ كّرتهم الدنيا فذ كروا وحدّثتهم فصدّقوا ووعظتهم
فٱتّعظوا. 3.121وقالعليهالسلام:إنّ للهملكًايناديفيكلّ يومل ِ
دُواللموتوٱجمعواللفناءوٱبنوا للخراب.
3.122وقالعليهالسلام:الدنيادارممرّإلىدارمقرّوالناسفيهارجلانرجلباعَنفسه
فأوبقها ورجل ٱبتاع نفسه فأعتقها. ١ش،ن،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩المغترّبغرورها⟨.ي:
⟩المغترّبغرورهابِم َتذمّهاأتغترّبالدنيا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 717 You who reproach this world---do you choose to be
deceived by her yet cen- sure her? Should you be accusing her, or should
she be accusing you? When did she lure or deceive you? Was it by her
destruction of your father and grand- father and great-grandfather
through decay? Or by her consigning your mother and grandmother and
great-grandmother to the earth?1 How carefully did your hands tend them!
How tenderly did your fingers nurse them! All the while you were hoping
against hope for a cure, begging physician after physician for a
treatment. Your apprehension did not benefit any one of them, your
appeal remained unanswered, and you could not keep death away from them,
even though you applied all your strength. In this way, the world warned
you of your own approaching end. By their death, she illustrated your
own. Indeed, this world is a house of truth for all who stay true to
her, a house of wellbeing for all whounderstandher,ahouseof
richesforallwhogatherherprovisions,ahouse of counsel for all who take
her advice. She is a mosque for God's loved ones, a place where God's
angels pray, where God's revelation alights, where God's saints
transact, earning his mercy and gaining paradise. Who would blame her,
when she has declared her imminent separation, proclaimed her impending
departure, and announced her and her people's impending destruction? By
her
trialsshehasillustratedthegreatesttrial,andbyherdelightsawakenedadesire
for the truest delight. In the evening she leaves you healthy and happy,
only to turn up the next morning with a terrible calamity. All this, to
awaken your desire and your alarm, to stir up your fear and your
vigilance. Some will blame her on the morning of regret. Others will
praise her on the day of resurrection. For she reminded them, and they
took heed. She told them about herself, and they believed. She counseled
them, and they were mindful. 3.121 An angel has been assigned by God to
call out every day: "Give birth for death! Gather for annihilation!
Build for destruction!"2 3.122 The world is a course through which we
must pass, not a permanent home. Its people are of two kinds: those who
sell their souls and destroy them, and those who ransom their souls and
set them free. 1 Lit. "your fathers" (ābāʾika) and "your mothers"
(ummahātika), meaning parents and fore- bears. 2 This saying is echoed
in the verse of the Abbasid poet Abū al-ʿAtāhiyah (Dīwān, 46), "Give
birth for death and build for destruction, for each of you walks the
path of death." لدوا للموت وٱبنوا للخراب فكلـّكم تصير إلى تباب al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 718 Text and
Translation
3.123وقالعليهالسلام:لايكونالصديقصديقًاحتّىيحفظأخاهفيثلاثفينكبته وغيبته
ووفاته. 3.124وقال عليه السلام: من أُعطي أربعًا لم يُحر َ م أربعًا من أعطي
الدعاء لم يحرم الإجابة ومن أعطي التوبة لم يحرم القبول ومن أعطي الاستغفار
لم يحرم المغفرة ومن أعطي الشكر لم يحرم الزيادة. وتصديق ذلك في كتاب الله
سبحانه قال الله عزّ وجلّ في الدعاء ﴿ٱدْعُونِيْ أَسْت َ جِب ْ لـ َ
كُمْ﴾وقالفيالاستغفار﴿وَمَن ْ ي َ عْمَلْ سُوْءًاأَوْ ي َ ظْلِمْن َ َ ي َ ّمُثُهَسْف سْت َ
غْفِرِاللّٰه َيَجِدِاللّٰه َغَفُورًا ِ ئَ ل﴿ ركشلا يف لاقو﴾اًميِحَر َ بْوَ ّتلا اَ مَ ّن ِإ﴿
ةبوتلا يف لاقو﴾ْمُكَ ّنَديِزَأَلْمُتْرَكَش ن َ لَ عُة ى اللّٰهِ َ ي َنيِذَ ّلِ ل بَءو ُ
ّسلاَنوُ لَمْع ِ ج َ ُ تَي َ ّمُثٍةَ لاَه بيِرَ ق ْنِمَنوُ بو ٍ ف َ ُ تَي َكِئَ لوُأ وب ِ
هْيَ لَ عُ هّٰللا ُ مْ وَ اًميِ لَ عُ هّٰللاَناَك حَكِيمًا﴾. 3.125وقال عليه السلام: الصلاة
قربان كلّ تقيّ . والحجّ جهاد كلّ ضعيف. ولكلّ شيء زكاة وزكاة البدن الصيام. َ بَ
ّتلا نسح ةأرملا داهجو .ل ُ ّع 3.126وقال عليه السلام: استنزلوا الرزق
بالصدقة ومن أيقن بالخلف جادَبالعطيّة. 3.127وقال عليه السلام: تنزل المعونة
على قدر المؤونة. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 719
3.123 A friend is not true unless he protects his brother in three
circumstances: in his misfortune, during his absence, and after his
death. 3.124 Whoever is granted four gifts will not be refused four
others: Whoever is granted the gift of prayer will not be refused an
answer. Whoever is granted the gift of repentance will not be refused
acceptance. Whoever is granted the gift of seeking forgiveness will not
be refused forgiveness. And whoever is granted the gift of gratitude
will not be refused further blessings.1 Verification is providedbythe
Bookof God:2 Aboutprayer,hehas said,«Pray to me and I will answer.»3
About seeking forgiveness, he has said, «Whoever does wrong or oppresses
his soul, but then seeks forgiveness from God, will find that God is
forgiving and merciful.»4 About gratitude, he has said, «If you give
thanks, you will be given more.»5 About repentance, he has said, «God
accepts the repentance of those who do wrong in ignorance then repent
soon thereafter; they are the ones whose repentance God accepts; God is
knowing and wise.»6 3.125 The pious draw near to God through the ritual
prayer.7 Hajj is the jihad of the frail. There is a levy on all
things---the body's is fasting. Being a good wife is a woman's jihad.
3.126 Draw down God's sustenance by giving alms. Those who are certain
about the hereafter give generously.8 3.127 Assistance is sent in
accordance with need.9 1 Similar to §3.407. 2 Both paragraphs of §3.124
are attributed to ʿAlī in Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 133, which is how I have
presented it here, whereas Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ18:331) reads the second
paragraph as Raḍī's commentary, Baḥrānī (B 970) does not clarify his
position, and the manuscripts of Rāwandī's commentary (R 3:309) differ
between the two positions. Both paragraphs are attributed to Imam Jaʿfar
al-Ṣādiq in Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl, 202. 3 Qurʾan, Ghāfir 40:60. 4 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ
4:110. 5 Qurʾan, Ibrāhīm 14:7. 6 Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:17. 7 This set of
sayings, §3.125, is attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §1.205,
1.72, 1.176, 1.73. 8 Second line attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī,
Shihāb, §2.31. 9 Similar line attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī,
Shihāb, §7.21. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 720 Text and
Translation 3.128وقال عليه السلام: ما عالَ ٱمرؤٌٱقتصد. 3.129وقال عليه
السلام: قل ّ ة العِيال أحد اليسارين. .لقعلا فصن د ُ ّدوتلاو والهمّ نصف اله
َ رم. 3.130وقال عليه السلام: ينزل الصبر على قدر المصيبة ومن ضرب يده على
فخ َ ذِه عند مصيبته حَبِط أجره. 3.131وقال عليه السلام: كم من صائم ليس له من
صيامه إلّا الظما١ و كم من قائم ليس له من قيامه إلّا العنا. حَبّذا نوم
الأَكياس وإفطارهم. 3.132وقال عليه السلام: سوسوا إيمانكم بالصدقة وحص ّ نوا
أموالـكم بالزكاة وٱدفعوا أمواج البلاء بالدعاء.
3.133نينمؤملاريمأيديبذخأدايزنبليمكلاق.ّيعَخَ ّنلادايزنبليمُكلمالسلاهيلعهمالك
صَأ اّملف ناّبـَ جلا ىلإ ينجرخأف هيلع هللا تاولص بلاط يبأ نبّيلع ْ ح َ صلا س
َ ّفنَت ر لاقّمث ءادَع ُ ّ ياكميلبنزيادإنّ
هذهالقلوبأَوعيةفخـيرهاأوعاهافٱحفظعنّيماأقوللك.الناس ثلاثة فعالم رَبّانيّ
ومتعلّم على سبيل النجاة وهَم َ جٌ رَعاعٌ أتباع كلّ ناعق يميلون مع كلّ ريح لم
يستضيئوا بنور العلم ولم يلجؤوا إلى ركن وثيق. يا كميل العلم خير من المال
العلم يحرسك وأنت تحرس المال والمال تنقصه النفقة والعلم يزكو على الإنفاق
وصنيع المال يزول بزواله. يا كميل بن زياد معرفة العلم دِينٌ ي ُ دانُ به ي َ
كسِب الإنسانُ الطاعة في حياته
وجميلالأحدوثةبعدوفاتهوالعلمحاكموالمالمحكومعليه.ياكميلبنزيادهلكخزّان
الأموال وهم أحياء والعلماء باقون ما بقي الدهر أعيانهم مفقودة وأمثالهم في
القلوب ١م،ش،ن،ھ:كذا.ي،وزيادةفيم،ش،وفيهامشھ:أضيفت ⟩والجوع⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 721
3.128 Practice moderation and need nothing.1 3.129 Having a small family
is one way to affluence.2 Affection is one half of discernment. Worry is
one half of aging. 3.130 Patience is rewarded in proportion to the
affliction. Those who strike their hand on their thigh when afflicted
lose their reward. 3.131 Many who fast gain nothing but thirst. Many who
pray gain nothing but fatigue. O how excellent the sleep and the food of
the wise! 3.132 Foster your faith through charity. Fortify your wealth
by paying the alms- levy.3 Ward off the gales of calamity by
supplicating God. 3.133 These are ʿAlī's words to Kumayl ibn Ziyād
al-Nakhaʿī, who narrated: The Com- manderof
theFaithful,ʿAlīibnAbīṬālib,tookmyhandandledmetowardthecemetery. When he
reached the desert, he sighed deeply, and said to me:4 Kumayl, these
hearts are like vessels, and the best are those that best receive and
store. Take heed of what I am about to tell you. There are three types
of people: those with divine learning, apprentices who walk the path of
salvation, and the ignorant rabble, followers of any bleating fool, who
sway with every wind, seeking neither illumination from the light of
knowledge, nor support from a sturdy column. Kumayl, knowledge is better
than wealth: knowledge protects you, whereas you must protect wealth,
wealth decreases with spend- ing, whereas knowledge increases when you
distribute it, and the benefits of wealth cease with its ceasing.
Kumayl, knowledge is a faith to be followed: it earns a man obedience
during his lifetime,5 and leaves a beautiful legacy of remembrance after
his death---and knowledge rules, whereas wealth is ruled over. Kumayl,
those who hoard wealth are dead even as they live, whereas the learned
remain for as long as the world remains---their persons may be lost, but
their teachings live on in the hearts of men. Truly, abundant knowledge
is housed here (signaling to his breast), if only I could find bearers
for it! But no! I 1 Similar line attributed to the Prophet Muḥammad in
Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §5.1. 2 Similar lines to §3.129, attributed to the
Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §1.23, 1.21, 1.22. 3 Ar. zakāh. The line is
attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §4.56. 4 Presumably in Kufa
during ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661. The Arabic word jabbān, an
uncommonwordfor"cemetery,"frequentlyrefersinthesourcestothecemeteryoutsideKufa.
5 Translation based on B 973. Or, "It helps you practice obedience to
your Lord in your lifetime," based on Ḥ18:349, citing Qurʾan, Fāṭir
35:28. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 722 Text and
Translation ريغ اً نِقَ ل بيصأ ىلَ ب ةلمح هل تبصأ ول (هردص ىلإ راشأو) اً ّمج
اً ملعل انهاه ّنإ اه .ةدوجوم مأمونعليهمستعمِل ً
هئايلوأىلعهججحبوهدابعىلعهللامعنباً رِهظتسموايندللنيدلاةلآا
أومُنقادًالحملةالحقّ لابصيرةلهفيأحنائهينقدحالشكّ فيقلبهلأوّلعارضمنشبهة ألا لا
ذا ولا ذاك أو منهومًا باللذة سَل ِ س القياد للشهوة أو مُغر َ مًا بالجمع
والادّخار ليسا تومب ملعلا تومي كلذك .ةمئاسلا ماعنألا امهب اً هَبَش ءيش برقأ
ءيش يف نيدلا ةاعر نم اًرومغم اًفئاخ وأ اًروهشم اً رهاظ اّمإ ةّجحب هلل مئاق نم
ضرألا ولخت ال ىلب ّمهّٰللا .هيلماح لئلّا تبطل حجج الله وبيّناته و كم ذا وأين
أولئك أولئك والله الأقلّون عددًا والأعظمون
قدرًايحفظاللهحججهوبيّناتهبهمحتّىيودعوهانظراءهمويزرعوهافيقلوبأشباههم هج َ
نوفَرتُ ملا هرعوتسٱ ام اونالتسٱو نيقيلا حور اورشابو ةريصبلا ةقيقح ىلع
ملعلا مهب م ىلعألا ّلحملاب ةقَ ّلعُم اهحاورأ نادبأب ايندلا اوبحصو نولهاجلا
هنم شحوتسٱ امب اوسِنأو .مهتيؤر ىلإ اً قوش هآ هآ .هنيد ىلإ ةاعدلاو هضرأ يف
هللا ءافلخ كئلوأ انصرف إذا شئت. 3.134وقال عليه السلام: المرء مَخبوء تحت
لسانه. 3.135وقال عليه السلام: هلك ٱمرؤ لم يعرف ق َ دْره. 3.136وقال عليه
السلام لرجل سأله أن يعظه لوقب ايندلا يف لوقي لمألا لوطب ةبوتلا ١يجزُ يو
لمعلا ريغب ةرخآلا وجري نّمم نكت ال الزاهدين ويعمل فيها بعمل الراغبين إن
أعطي منها لم يشبع وإن منع منها لم يقنع يعجز عن شكر ما أوتي ويبتغي
الزيادة فيما بقي ينهى ولا ينتهي ويأمر بما لا يأتي يحب ّ الصالحـين ولا
يعمل عملهم ويبغض المذنبين وهو أحدهم يكره الموت لـكثرة ذنوبه اذإ هسفنب
بَجعُ ي اً يهال نمأ ّحص نإو اًمدان ّلظ مقس نإ هل توملا هركي ام ىلع ميقيو
هبلغت ا ً ّرتغُم ضرعأ ءاخر هلان نإو اً ّرطضم اعد ءالب هباصأ نإ يلتبٱ اذإ
طنقيو يفوع ١ن،ش،ھ:كذا.ي،ونسخةفيھ: ⟩يرجئ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 723 encounter clever students who are not trustworthy, who
use the instrument of religion for worldly benefit, who attempt to use
God's favors to attack his ser- vants, and his
proofstogainvictoryoverhis select. I encounterothers who have been
guided to the bearers of truth but have no real perception---doubt is
kin- dled in their hearts by the first appearance of misgivings. Hark,
neither is to be countenanced!There is a third type, enamored of carnal
pleasures, easily led to passions, or yet another, in thrall to hoarding
and collecting. Neither is mindful of
religion.Infact,theyareclosesttograzingcattle.Thisishowknowledgedies,
through the death of its bearers. But no, by God! There will always be a
person on earth who upholds God's proof---whether visible and known or
fearful and concealed---for God's proof can never be overthrown. How
many are they, and where? By God, they are few in number, but great in
stature! Through them God protects his proof, until they entrust it to
others like them, sowing it in the heartsof
theirpeers.Knowledgehasledthemtorealperception,enablingthem to touch the
spirit of certainty, to deem easy what the dissolute find difficult, and
take comfort in what the ignorant find miserable. In this world they
live in bodies whose spirits are linked tothe highest abode.They
areGod'svicegerents on his earth, who call to his religion. Ah! Would
that I could see them! You may take your leave now. 3.134 A man is
concealed behind his tongue. 3.135 The man who does not recognize his
own worth will perish. 3.136 ʿAlī said to a man who asked him for
counsel:1 Donotbeoneof
thosewhoexpectthehereafterwithoutworkorwhopostpone repentance through
complacent hopes of a long life. They talk of rejecting the world but
reveal their desire for it in their conduct. When they are given of its
stocks, they are not satisfied, when those are withheld from them, they
are angry. Incapable of gratitude for God's gifts, they want more. They
forbid oth- ers from evil but do not desist, they command others to do
good but do not perform. They love good people but do not behave like
them, they detest the wicked but resemble them.They fear death because
of their many sins yet con- tinue to do the very things that make them
fearful. If they fall ill, they repent, but once healthy, they feel
secure and resume their frolics. When fit, they are full of themselves,
but when tested, they despair. When afflicted with poverty, they
supplicate God and beg him, but when they regain affluence, they turn 1
Part of an oration delivered on the pulpit in the Grand Mosque of Kufa,
following the Battle of Nahrawān in 38/658. Muttaqī-Hindī, Kanz, 16:205.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 724 Text and
Translation نفسهعلىمايظنّ
ولايغلبهاعلىمايستيقنيخافعلىغيرهبأدنىمنذنبهويرجولنفسه بأكثر من عمله إن
ٱستغنى ب َ ِ تُ فو رِط َ نَ ق رقتفٱ نإو ن ط ووَهَن يقصّر إذا عمل ويبالغ إذا
سأل إن عرضت له شهوة أسلف المعصية وسوّف التوبة وإن عَرَته محنة ٱنفرج عن
شرائط المل ّ ة يصف العبرة ولا يعتبر ويبالغ في الموعظة ولا يتّعظ فهو
بالقول مُدِلّ ومن العمل مُقِلّ ينافس فيما يفنى ويسامح فيما يبقى يرى الغُنْم مَغْر
َ مًا والغرم مَغْن َ مًا يخشى الموتولايبادرالفوتيستعظممنمعصيةغيرهمايستقلّ
أكثرمنهمننفسهويستكثر من طاعته ما يحقره من طاعة غيره فهو على الناس طاعن
ولنفسه مُداهِن اللهو مع الأغنياءأحب ّ إليهمنالذ
كرمعالفقراءيحكمعلىغيرهلنفسهولايحكمعليهالغيرهويرشد غيره ويغوي نفسه فهو ي
ُ طاع وي َ عصي وي َ الو هّبر ريغ يف قلخلا ىشخيو يفوُ ي الو يفوتس يخشى ربّه
في خلقه. ولو لم يكن في هذا الكتاب إلّا هذا الكلام لـكفى به موعظة ناجعة
وحكمة بالغة وبصيرة لمبصر وعبرة لناظر مفكّر. 3.137وقال عليه السلام: لكلّ
ٱمرئ١ عاقبة حلوة أو مرّة. 3.138وقال عليه السلام: لكلّ مقبل إدبار وما أدبر
كأن لم يكن. 3.139وقال عليه السلام: لا يعدم الصبور الظفر وإن طال به
الزمان. 3.140وقال عليه السلام: الراضي بفعل قوم كالداخل معهم فيه وعلى كلّ
داخل في باطل إثمان إثم العمل به وإثم الرضى به. ١ن،ي،ھ:كذا.ش: ⟩أمر⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 725
away in prideful delusion. Their ego compels them to follow its
inclinations, they do not compel it to follow the path of certainty. For
others, they expect punishment for sins lesser than their own, for
themselves, they expect greater reward than their deeds have earned. If
they acquire wealth, they turn inso- lent and are seduced, if they
become poor, they despair and grow weak. They fall short in their deeds
yet make grand requests. If passions tempt them, they go ahead and sin,
postponing repentance for later. If tribulation strikes them, they cast
off the curbs of religion. They describe the world's lessons to others
but do not themselves learn. They deliver pretentious sermons but do not
take them to heart. Their words are bold, but their deeds are few. They
compete for what perishes but are generous in giving away what endures.
They see gain as loss and loss as gain. They fear death yet do nothing
in its anticipation. They consider others' sins momentous yet deem
insignificant their own numerous transgressions.They glorify their own
acts of obedience yet think the same acts contemptible when others do
them. They calumniate others and flatter them- selves. Idle talk with
the rich is dearer to them than worshipping God with the poor. They
judge others but not themselves. They counsel others but delude
themselves. They expect others to obey them, yet they disobey. They
expect full measure but do not pay a fair price. When facing their Lord,
they fear his creatures. When facing his creatures, they do not fear
their Lord. Raḍī: If this book contained just these words and nothing
else, it would contain enough
effectivecounsel,far-reachingwisdom,discernmentforthosewhodiscern,andlessons
for those who see and think! 3.137 Every man faces an outcome, whether
sweet or bitter.1 3.138 Everything that moves forward turns back, and
everything that turns back is as if it never were. 3.139 Success comes
to those who are patient, even if the wait is long. 3.140 Anyone who
agrees with other people's deeds is a doer himself, and any- one who
does wrong commits two sins: the sin of committing the deed and the sin
of agreeing with those who committed it. 1 Ar. kullu -mriʾin. Or, based
on the variant reading in ms Sh, "Everything (kullu amrin) has a
consequence, whether sweet or bitter." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 726 Text
and Translation 3.141وقال عليه السلام: اعتصموا بالذمم في أوتادها.
3.142.هتلاهجب نورذعُ ت ال نم ةعاطب مكيلع :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.143وقال عليه
السلام: قد ب ُ صّرتم إن أبصرتم وقد هُديتم إن ٱهتديتم. 3.144وقال عليه
السلام: عات ِ ب أخاك بالإحسان إليه وٱردد شرّه بالإنعام عليه. 3.145.ّنظلا
هب ءاسأ نم ّنمولي الف ةمْه ُ ّتلا عضاوم هسفن عضو نم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.146وقال عليه السلام: من ملك ٱستأثر ومن ٱستبدّ برأيه هلك ومن شاور الرجال
.هديب ةرَ يِ ـخلا تناكهّرس متك نمو اهلوقع يف اهكراش 3.147وقال عليه السلام:
الفقر الموت الأكبر. 3.148وقال عليه السلام: من قضى حقّ من لا يقضي حقّه فقد
عبده. 3.149وقال عليه السلام: لا طاعة لمخلوق في معصية الخالق. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 727
3.141 Protect your covenants and secure their fastenings.1 3.142 Obey
the one you are required to obey---your failure to recognize him will
not be pardoned.2 3.143 Truly, you have been given the capacity to see
if you would but look, to be guided if you would but follow.3 3.144
Chastise your brother by being good to him. Deflect his malice by being
generous to him. 3.145 A person who frequents places of ill repute
should not blame those who suspect him of wrongdoing. 3.146 One who
gains power usurps. One who clings to his own opinion per- ishes. One
who consults mature men partakes of the fruit of their minds. One who
conceals his secret retains his options. 3.147 Poverty is the ultimate
death. 3.148 If you offer dues to a man who does not offer you yours in
return, you have offered him servile worship. 3.149 Do not obey humans
if it means that you will disobey God.4 1 From a lengthy address by ʿAlī
when Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam and several of the Freedmen of Quraysh came to
offer him allegiance after they were taken captive by ʿAlī's forces at
the Bat- tle of the Camel in 36/656. ʿAlī is reported to have exclaimed,
"Did you not pledge allegiance to me yesterday?" i.e., in Medina after
ʿUthmān's death (similar lines in §1.70). Ḥ18:372. "Fas- tenings," lit.
"pegs" (awtād) refers to "commitments," after R 3:336; or to
"trustworthy persons,"
thustranslatingas:"Protectyourcompactswithtrustworthypersons,"anddonotrelyoncom-
pacts offered by disbelievers and rebels, after Ḥ18:372, citing Qurʾan,
Tawbah 9:10--12. 2 Included in a deathbed testament of counsel ʿAlī
wrote for his children and followers, thus in Kufa in 40/661 (Nuʿmān,
Daʿāʾim, 2:353). According to all the commentators, "the one you must
obey" refers to ʿAlī himself. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ18:373) explains: ʿAlī
is an Imam, obe- dience to whom is mandatory according to all Muslims,
through the community's pledge,
accordingtoSunnis,andthroughtheProphet'sappointment,accordingtotheShiʿa;andwho-
ever fails to recognize his imamate will burn in hellfire; no excuse
will be deemed acceptable. 3 Included in §1.20. 4 Attributed to the
Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §6.34. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 728 Text and
Translation 3.150.هل سيل ام ذخأ نم باعي امّنإ هّقح ريخأتب ءرملا باعُ ي ال
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.151وقال عليه السلام: الإعجاب يمنع من الازدياد.
3.152وقال عليه السلام: الأمر قريب والاصطحاب قليل. 3.153وقال عليه السلام:
قد أضاء الصبح لذي عينين. 3.154وقال عليه السلام: ترك الذنب أهون من طلب
التوبة. 3.155وقال عليه السلام: كم من أَكْلة منعت أَكَلات. 3.156وقال عليه
السلام: الناس أعداء ما جهلوا. 3.157وقال عليه السلام: من ٱستقبل وجوه
الآراء عرف مواقع الخطأ. 3.158وقال عليه السلام: من أحدّ سِنان الغضب لله قوي
على قتل أشدّاء الباطل. 3.159وقال عليه السلام: إذا هِبْت .هنم فاخت اّمم مظعأ
هيّقَوَ ت ةّدش ّنإف هيف ْعَقف اًرمأ َ 3.160وقال عليه السلام: آلة الرياسة سعة
الصدر. 3.161وقال عليه السلام: ازجر المسيء بثواب المحسن. 3.162وقال عليه
السلام: احصد الشرّمن صدر غيرك بقلعه من صدرك. 3.163َ ت ةجاج َ ّللا :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو سُلّ الرأي. 3.164وقال عليه السلام: الطمع رِق ّ مُؤبّد. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 729
3.150 Don't condemn the man who delays in securing what belongs to him.
It's the man who takes what does not belong to him who deserves your
condem- nation. 3.151 Vanity impedes growth. 3.152 The end is near, and
the fellowship is short. 3.153 The morning is bright for those who have
eyes. 3.154 Not sinning is easier than seeking pardon. 3.155 How many a
morsel has prevented a full meal!1 3.156 People hate the unfamiliar.2
3.157 Those who seek others' opinions recognize potential pitfalls.3
3.158 Those who sharpen spears of righteous anger have the strength to
strike down champions of evil. 3.159 If you fear something, jump right
into it. The strain of avoiding is worse than the thing you fear. 3.160
Broad-mindedness is the instrument of leadership.4 3.161 Repay malice
with kindness and you will have rebuked. 3.162 Cut away malice from
others' hearts by uprooting it from your own. 3.163 Hostility robs one
of judgment.5 3.164 Greed is perpetual bondage. 1 Repurposed by Ḥarīrī
(Maqāmāt, 24), in his Kufa Maqāmah, §5. 2 Identical to §3.409. 3 Part of
ʿAlī's testament of counsel to his son Ḥusayn. Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 90. 4 Ar.
saʿat al-ṣadr, lit. "An expansive chest is the instrument of
leadership." 5 The translation follows B 979. Or it could be translated
more specifically as "\[Your\] hostility steals \[the opportunity to
implement my, i.e., ʿAlī's\] good strategy," after Ḥ18:412. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 730 Text and
Translation 3.165وقال عليه السلام: ثمرة التفريط الندامة وثمرة الحزم
السلامة.
3.166وقالعليهالسلام:لاخيرفيالصمتعنالحكمكماأنّهلاخيرفيالقولبالجهل.
3.167وقال عليه السلام: ما ٱختلفت دعوتان إلّا كانت إحداهما ضلالة.
3.168وقال عليه السلام: ما شككت ُ في الحقّ مذ أُريته. 3.169وقال عليه
السلام: ما كَذبتُ ولا كُذبت ولا ضَللت ولا ضُلّ بي. 3.170وقال عليه السلام:
للظالم البادي غدًا بكفّه عَضّة. 3.171وقال عليه السلام: الرحيل وشيك.
3.172وقال عليه السلام: من أبدى صفحته للحقّ هلك. 3.173وقال عليه السلام: من
لم ي ُ نجِه الصبر أهلـكه الجزع. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 731
3.165 Extravagance yields regret, prudence yields wellbeing. 3.166 There
is no virtue in holding back wisdom, just as there is no virtue in
ignorant speech. 3.167 When two missions differ, one is wrong. 3.168 I
have never doubted the truth ever since it was shown to me.1 3.169 I
have never lied, nor have I been lied to.2 I have never strayed, nor
have I been led to stray. 3.170 One who instigates violence will bite
his knuckles on the morrow.3 3.171 The time for departure draws nigh.
3.172 Those who challenge the truth perish.4 3.173 Those who are not
saved by patience are slain by panic. 1 From oration §1.4, delivered
after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656, addressing Ṭalḥah and Zubayr
posthumously, as well as their defeated followers. R 136 (after
Miskawayh); Ḥ1:209; B 164. 2 "Nor have I been lied to," means I have
never been lied to by the Prophet in what he informed me would happen (B
980). This line is placed by the sources within several orations by
ʿAlī, and may have been spoken by him on various occasions: (1) At the
Battle of the Camel, out- side Basra in 36/656, responding to a man who
chastised him for fighting Muslims (Ḥ1:265,
afterAbūMikhnaf);(2)intheKufamosque,addressingamanfromBasra(Māmaṭīrī,
Nuzhah, 178); (3) at Ṣiffīn in 37/657, addressing his followers
(Minqarī,Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 315); and (4) at the Battle of Nahrawān, in
38/658 either before the battle, or afterward, while instructing peo-
ple to look for Dhū al-Thudayyah among the Kharijites' corpses
(Ṭabarī,Tārīkh, 5:88; Nuʿmān, Manāqib, 214; Ḥ6:129, 18:368). 3 I.e., in
remorse. Reference to Qurʾan, Furqān 25:27. 4 Included in §1.16, ʿAlī's
first oration after the pledge of allegiance to him as caliph in Medina
in 35/656. Translation follows Ḥ18:371; R 3:337. Following B 980 and F
436, the line may alter- natively be translated as, "Whoever exposes his
face for the sake of truth will be killed \[by the ignorant
masses\]"---the inserted final phrase is stated explicitly in §1.16.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 732 Text and
Translation 3.174وقال عليه السلام: واعجباه أتكون الخلافة بالصحابة ولا
تكون بالصحابة والقرابة. وروي له شعر في هذا المعنى وهو١ تْنُك ْنِإَ ف َ ـلَم
ىٰرو ُ ّشلاِب َ كْت َ أُمُورَهُمْ ف َ كَيْــف َ بِهٰــذَا وَالم ُ شِيــر ُ بَ ّيُغ َنو ٗ
تْنُك ْن ِإَو َ بِالْقُرْب ٰ ى حَجَجْت َ خَصِيمَهُمْ ف َ غَيْـــر ُ َ رْقَأَو ِّيـــِبَ ّنلاِب
ىـــٰ لْوَأ َك ب ٗ 3.175هردابت بْهَنو ايانملا هيف لضتنَ ت ضَرَغ ايندلا يف ءرملا
امّنإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو المصائب ومع كلّ جُرعة ش َ رَق ٌ وفي كلّ أُكلة غَصَص. ولا
ينال العبد نعمة إلّا بفراق انسفنأو نونَ ملا ناوعأ نحنف .هلجأ نم رخآ قارفب
اّلإ هرمع نم اًموي لبقتسي الو ىرخأ ن َ ص ْ ب اعرسأ اّلإ اً فرش ءيش نم اعفري
مل راهنلاو ليللا اذهو ءاقبلا وجرن نيأ نمف فوتُ حلا ُ .اعمج ام قيرفتو ايَ نَ
ب ام مده يف ةّركـلا 3.176وقال عليه السلام: يا ٱبن آدم ما كسبت فوق قوتك
فأنت فيه خازن لغيرك. 3.177وقالعليهالسلام:إنّ
للقلوبشهوةوإقبالًاوإدبارًافأتوهامنقِب َ لشهوتهاوإقبالها فإنّ القلب إذا أُكره
عَمِي. 3.178وكان عليه السلام يقول متى أشفي غيظي إذا غضبت أحين أعجز عن
الانتقام فيقال لي لو صبرت أم حين أقدر عليه فيقال لي لو عفوت.٢
١البحر:الطويل. ٢ش،ن،ونسخةفيھ:كذا.ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش،ن: ⟩غفرت⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 733
3.174 How sad, how strange! So, the caliphate can be justified through
the Prophet'scompanionship,butnotthroughcompanionshipandkinshiptogeth-
er!1 The following verses are attributed to ʿAlī in the same vein: If
you became their ruler through consultation, How is this valid when the
counsellors were absent? If you argued against your opponent through
kinship, Then another, closer than you to the Prophet, is worthier!
3.175 Every man in this world is a target at which fate shoots its
arrows, he is booty for calamity to plunder. With every sip he chokes,
with every bite he gags. He obtains no blessing without relinquishing
another, greets no new day except after bidding farewell to one from his
allotted share. We are all death's assistants, and our human forms are
quarries of doom---how can we hope to survive? Night and Day erect
nothing without swerving back to destroy what they have built, to
scatter what they have brought together!2 3.176 Son of Adam, whatever
you earn above your needs, you keep in store for another. 3.177 Hearts
have passions, there are times when they are receptive and others when
they are withdrawn. Approach them by way of their passions, then, and at
times when they are receptive, for a heart turns blind when coerced.3
3.178 When should I satisfy my rage? Should it be when I have no power
to demand vengeance and am admonished, "You should forbear!" or when I
have the power to exact retribution and am advised, "You should
forgive"? 1 Immediately after the death of the Prophet in Medina in
11/632, when Abū Bakr was sworn in as caliph. As explained in my Note on
the Edition and Translation: Previous Editions (p. 48), this is the
original text (واعجباه أتكون الخلافة بالصحابة ولا تكون بالصحابة والقرابة
,)transcribed thus in all early manuscripts I used and all medieval
commentaries I looked at. (See also lines to this effect in ʿAlī's
letter to Muʿāwiyah, §2.28.2.) In the modern print editions, it has been
corrupted to: (واعجباهأتكونالخلافةبالصحابةوالقرابة " :)How strange that
the caliphate is justified through companionship and kinship!" 2 Related
with some variants in §1.143.1. Ḥarrānī (Tuḥaf, 98) transcribes it
within the aphoristic oration titled Wasīlah. 3 First lines similar to
§3.298. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 734 Text and
Translation 3.179وقال عليه السلام وقد مرّ بقذر على مَزبلة هذا ما بخل به
الباخلون. ورُوي أنّه قال عليه السلام هذا ما كنتم تتنافسون فيه بالأمس.
3.180وقال عليه السلام: لم يذهب من مالك ما وعظك. 3.181َ مَ ت بولقلا ّنإ
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو لّ كما تملّ الأبدان فٱبتغوا لها طرائف الحكمة. 3.182⟨هلل
الإ مكح ال⟩ جراوخلا لوق عمس اّ مل مالسلا هيلع لاقو .لطاب اهب دارُ ي ّقح
ةملك 3.183وقال عليه السلام في صفة الغَوغاء .اوفرعُ ي مل اوقّرفت اذإو اوبلَ غ
اوعمتجٱ اذإ نيذلا مه وقيل بل قال هم الذين إذا ٱجتمعوا ضَرّوا وإذا تفرّقوا
نفعوا. فقيل قد علمنا مَضَرّة ٱجتماعهم فما منفعة ٱفتراقهم فقال ىلإ جاّسَ ّنلاو
هئانب ىلإ ءاّنـَ بلا عوجرك مهب سانلا عفتنيف مهنهم ىلإ نَهِ ملا باحصأ عجري
.هزَ بـخَم ىلإ زاّبـَ خلاو هجَسنَم 3.184وقال عليه السلام وقد أُتي ب ِ جانٍ ومعه
غَوغاء .ةءوَس ّلك دنع اّلإ ىرُ ت ال هوجوب اً بحرم ال 3.185وقال عليه السلام:
إنّ مع كلّ إنسان ملـكَين يحفظانه فإذا جاء القدر خَلّيا بينه وبينه وإنّ الأجل
جُنّة حصينة. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 735
3.179 Walking past refuse on a rubbish dump, ʿAlī exclaimed: This is
what the misers hoarded! Raḍī: It is alternatively narrated that ʿAlī
exclaimed: This is what you were brawling over yesterday! 3.180 Wealth
is not lost if losing it teaches you a lesson. 3.181 Minds tire, just as
bodies tire, so seek for them wondrous novelties of wisdom.1 3.182
Hearing the Kharijites' slogan, ⟨No rule save God's!⟩ʿAlī remarked:2 The
statement is true, but the intent is false. 3.183 Describing the rabble
among people, ʿAlī said:3 When they unite, they overpower. When they
disperse, they can't be recog- nized. Raḍī: It is alternatively narrated
that what he said was this: When they unite, they harm. When they
disperse, they benefit. Raḍī: He was asked, "We know of the harm they
cause when they unite, but what is the benefit they offer when they
disperse?" and he replied: Workers return to their work, and everyone
benefits. The builder returns to building, the weaver returns to
weaving, and the baker returns to baking. 3.184 A felon, with a crowd
behind him, was brought before ʿAlī, who exclaimed:4 How contemptible
these faces seen only at the site of someone's shame! 3.185 Each person
has two angels assigned to protect him, until, when his ordained fate
approaches, they let it in. In truth, your allotted span is a pow- erful
shield.5 1 Nearly identical to §3.83. 2 In Kufa, after the arbitration
in 37/658. Yaʿqūbī, Tārīkh, 2:191; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:72--73. See also
§1.40 and §1.182 and the accompanying notes. 3 Presumably in Kufa,
during ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661. 4 Presumably in Kufa, during
ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661. Lit. "No welcome to these faces" (lā
marḥaban bi-wujūhin). 5 A little before ʿAlī was killed in Kufa in
40/661, when a man from the Murād tribe came to him towarnhimof
histribesmenIbnMuljamal-Murādī'sintenttokillhim.IbnSaʿd,Ṭabaqāt,3:43.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 736 Text and
Translation 3.186وقال عليه السلام وقد قال له طلحة والزبير نبايعك على أنّا
شركاؤك في هذا الأمر لا ولـكنّكما شريكان في القوّة والاستعانة وعونان على
العجز والأَوَد.
3.187وقالعليهالسلام:أيّهاالناسٱتّقوااللهالذيإنقلتمسمعوإنأضمرتمعلموبادروا
الموت الذي إن هربتم أدرككم وإن أقمتم أخذ كم وإن نسيتموه ذ كر كم.
3.188هيلع كركشي دقف كل هركشي ال نم فورعملا يف كّندهزُ ي ال :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو من لا يستمتع بشيء منه وقد ت ُ بِحُيُ هَ ّللٱَو﴿ رفاكلا عاضأ اّمم رثكأ
ركاشلا ركش نم كرد ُ ّ ٱلْم ُ حْسِنِينَ﴾. 3.189وقال عليه السلام: كلّ وِعاء يضيق
بما جُعل فيه إلّا وعاء العلم فإنّه يتّسع. 3.190وقال عليه السلام: أوّل عِوَض
الحليم من حلمه أنّ الناس أنصاره على الجاهل. 3.191وقال عليه السلام: إن لم
تكن حليمًا فتحلّم فإنّه ق َ لّ مَن تشبّه بقوم إلّا أوشك أن يكون منهم. 3.192وقال
عليه السلام: مَن حاسَب َ نفسه رَب ِ ح ومن غفل عنها خسر ومن خاف أمن ومن
ٱعتبر أبصر ومن أبصر فهم ومن فهم علم. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 737 3.186 Ṭalḥah and Zubayr said to ʿAlī, "We will pledge
allegiance to you if you make us partners in your caliphate," and he
replied:1 No, but you are partners in strength and victory, and advisors
in distress and adversity. 3.187 People, fear God, for he hears what you
say and knows what you con- ceal. Hasten to prepare for death, for death
will seize you even when you stay still and remember you even if you
forget. 3.188 Don't let a recipient's ingratitude stop you from doing
good---the one who reaps no benefit from your generosity thanks you, and
you may well find more gratitude there than the ingrate withheld! «God
loves those who do good.»2 3.189
Everyvesselconstrictsasitfillsup,exceptthevesselof knowledge,which
expands. 3.190 The first reward of a man who shows restraint is that
people side with him against his boorish challenger. 3.191 If you are
not a patient man, then mimic those who are---rarely does someone mimic
people without becoming at least a little bit like them. 3.192 Whoever
takes himself to task profits, whoever neglects his soul loses, and
whoever fears God secures safety. Whoever heeds lessons discerns, who-
ever discerns understands, and whoever understands realizes the truth. 1
Presumably in Medina in 35 or 36/656, soon after the pledge of
allegiance to ʿAlī as caliph. "Victory" (istiʿānah, after Ḥ19:22, who
explains it as al-fawz wa-l-ẓafar) is an unusual denota- tion for
istiʿānah, which is more commonly used to denote "seeking aid." As Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd explains, though, here it is derived from the proverb, qad
jarā bnā ʿinān (⟨The two 'sons' of ʿinān⟩---i.e., two lines drawn in the
earth to frighten off birds---⟨have made their run⟩), said of one who
draws the winning arrow in a pre-Islamic game of chance; istaʿāna
al-insān ("A person performed istiʿānah", with the xth form verb of the
same root, "ʿ-W-N") is said of some- one who utters this proverb. On
Ṭalḥah's and Zubayr's pledge to ʿAlī and their subsequent breaking of
it, see Ḥ11:10--20. See also §1.203. 2 Qurʾan, Āl ʿImrān 3:134,148,
Māʾidah 5:93. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 738 Text and
Translation 3.193َ تَ ل :مالسلا هيلع لاقو .اهدلو ىلع سورَ ّضلا فطع اهسامِش
دعب انيلع ايندلا َ ّنَفِطْع ُ مَ ّن نَأ ُديِرُ نَو﴿ كلذ بيقع التو َ لَ ع َ ّن ُ
تْسٱ َنيِذَ ّ لٱ ى ض ْ عِفُواْ فِي ٱلأَرْضِ وَنَجْعَل َ ًةَ ّمِئَأ ْمُه وَنَجْعَل َ .﴾َنيِ
ثِراَوْلٱُمُه 3.194وقال عليه السلام: اتّقوا الله تقيّة من شمّر تجريدًا وجَدّ تشميرًا
وأَكْم َ ش في مَه َ ل ِ ئوَ ملا ةّرَك يف رظنو لجو نع ردابو ل وعاقبة الم َ
.عـِجرَ ملا ةّبَغَمو رَدص 3.195وقال عليه السلام الجود حارس الأعراض. .هيف َ
ّسلا مادِف ملحلاو والعفو زكاة الظفر. .ردغ نّمم كضَوِعّول ُ ّسلاو والاستشارة
عين الهداية وقد خاطر من ٱستغنى برأيه. والصبر يناضل الحِدْثان والجزع من
أعوان الزمان. .ىنُ ملا كرت ىنغلا فرشأو و كم من عقل أسير تحت هوًى أمير. ومن
التوفيق حفظ التجربة. والمودّة قرابة مُستفادة. ولا تأمننّ مَلولًا. 3.196وقال
عليه السلام: عُجْب المرء بنفسه أحد حُسّاد عقله. 3.197ضرَ ت مل اّلإو ىذَقلا ىلع
ِضْغَأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ أبدًا. 3.198وقال عليه السلام: مَن لانَ عُودهكَث ُ ف
أغصانه. 3.199وقال عليه السلام: الخلاف يهدم الرأي. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 739 3.193 ʿAlī said: The world will bend for us after
refusing us its back, just as an irascible camel mare bends toward its
young. He then recited the Qurʾanic verse: «We intend to bless those
rendered weak on earth with abundant favors. We shall make them Imams.
We shall make them inherit.»1 3.194 Fear God, people! Gird your loins
and sprint, roll your sleeves and strive, race ahead during this brief
reprieve, act quickly against the danger that looms! Remember the final
return, the inexorable outcome, and the ultimate end! 3.195 Generosity
protects reputations. Forbearance muzzles the fool. The tax due on
victory is pardon. Solace serves as recompense for betrayal.
Consultation is the essence of direction---whoever disdains advice faces
danger. Patience shoots down calamities. Panic is an ally of fate. The
most honorable wealth is abandoned desire.2 Many minds lie captive under
passion's rule. Learning from experience is evidence of God's direction.
Affection is a valuable form of kinship. Don't trust the discontent.
3.196 A man's vanity is his intellect's jealous foe. 3.197 Forget about
the speck in your eye, else you will never be happy. 3.198 If your trunk
is pliant, your branches will be thick.3 3.199 Resistance ruins
strategy. 1 Qurʾan, Qaṣaṣ28:5. 2 Exact line in §3.29. 3 I.e., if you are
humble, you will have many supporters (B 985; Ḥ19:35). Or, "One who is
too soft is disrespected by his subordinates" (Waṭwāṭ, Maṭlūb, 44).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 740 Text and
Translation 3.200وقال عليه السلام: من نالَ ٱستطال. 3.201.لاجرلا رهاوجُ ملع
لاوحألا بُ ّلقت يف :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.202وقال عليه السلام: حسد الصديق من
سُقم المودّة. 3.203.عماطملا قورُ ب تحت لوقعلا عراصم رثكأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.204وقال عليه السلام: ليس من العدل القضاء على الثقة بالظنّ. 3.205سئِ ب
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ الزادُإلى المعاد العُدوان على العباد. 3.206وقال عليه
السلام: من أشرف أفعال الـكريم غفلته عمّا يعلم. 3.207.هبيع سانلاَرَ ي مل
هبوثُءايحلا هاسَك نَم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.208نولصاولا رثكي ةفَصَ ّنلابو ةبيَ
هلا نوكت تمصلا ةرثكب :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ةريسلابوددوسلابجينَؤُ
ملالامتحٱبوةمعنلاّمتتعضاوتلابورادقألامظعتلاضفإلابو العادلة ي ُ .هيلع
راصنألا رثكت هيف َ ّسلا نع ملحلابو يوانُ ملا رهق 3.209وقال عليه السلام:
العَجَب ُ لغفلة الح ُ سّاد عن سلامة الأجساد. 3.210وقال عليه السلام: الطامع
في وَثاق الذلّ. 3.211وقال عليه السلام وقد سئل عن الإيمان الإيمان معرفة
بالقلب وإقرار باللسان وعمل بالأركان. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 741 3.200 One who gets what he wants waxes arrogant. 3.201
Capricious conditions reveal the mettle of men. 3.202 Envying a friend
poisons affection. 3.203 Most shattered minds are felled by the
lightning bolt of greed. 3.204 When suspicions dictate judgment, justice
fails. 3.205 Aggression toward God's servants is your worst provision
for the return to him. 3.206 The noblest deed of the generous is to
overlook. 3.207 Wear the robe of modesty and conceal your flaws. 3.208
Silence generates awe, justice multiplies friends, generosity elevates
stature, humility completes blessings, providing for others brings
glory, upright behavior vanquishes the enemy, and forbearance in the
face of a fool increases your helpers against him. 3.209 I wonder at the
envier's disregard for the harm he brings to his own health! 3.210 The
greedy are tethered to shame. 3.211 ʿAlī was asked about faith, and he
said: To believe is to recognize with your heart, acknowledge with your
tongue, and act with your limbs. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 742 Text and
Translation 3.212وقال عليه السلام من أصبح على الدنيا حزينًا فقد أصبح
لقضاء الله ساخطًا ومن أصبح يشكو مصيبة نآرقلاأرقنموهنيداثلُ
ثبهذهانغلعضاوتفاً ّينغىتأنموهّبروكشيحبصأدقفهبتلزن
فماتفدخلالنارفهوممّنكانيتّخذآياتاللههُز ُ بحبهبلقجـِ هَ لنمواًو ّ الدنياٱلتاط
َ منها بثلاث رتي ال صرحو هّبغُ ي ال ّمه ٍ كه وأمل لا يدر كه. 3.213وقال
عليه السلام: كفى بالقناعة مُلكًا وبحسن الخلق نعيمًا. 3.214ُ نَ لَ ف﴿ ىلاعت
هلوق نع :مالسلا هيلع لئسو َ بِّيَطًةاَ يَحُهَ ّنَ يِيْح ةً﴾فقال هي القناعة.
3.215وقال عليه السلام: شارِ كوا الذي قد أقبل عليه الرزق فإنّه أخلق للغنى
وأجدر بإقبال الحظ ّ . 3.216﴾ِناَسْحإلٱَو ِلْدَعْلٱِبُرُم ْأَيَ هَ ّللٱ َ ّن ِإ﴿ ىلاعت
هللا لوق يف مالسلا هيلع لاقو .ل ُ ّضفتلا ناسحإلاو فاصنإلا لدعلا 3.217طعُ
ي ةريصقلا ديلاب ِطعُ ي نَم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ باليد الطويلة. ومعنى ذلك أنّ
ما ينفقه المرء من ماله في سبيل الخـير والبرّوإن كان يسيرًا فإنّ الله تعالى
يجعل
الجزاءعليهعظيمًاكثيرًا.واليدانهاهناعبارتانعنالنعمتينففرّقبيننعمةالعبدونعمةالرب
ّ فجعل تلك قصيرة وهذه طويلة لأنّ نعم الله سبحانه أبدًا ت ُ اً فاعضأ
نيقولخملا معن ىلع فَعض .عَزنُ ت اهنمو عجرت اهيلإ ةمعن ّلكف اهّلك معنلا لصأ
ىلاعت همعن تناك ذإ ةريثك 3.218وقال لٱبنه الحسن عليهما السلام لا ت َ دعُوَنّ
إلى مُبارزة وإن دُعيت َ إليها فأجب فإنّ الداعي باغٍ والباغي مصروع. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 743
3.212 ʿAlī said:
WhoeverlamentstheworldisdiscontentwithGod'sprovidence,whoevercom- plains
about an affliction complains about his Lord, whoever humbles himself
before a rich man because he is rich forfeits two thirds of his
religion, any Qurʾan reciter who dies and enters hellfire was one of
those who mocked God's signs,1 and any heart that accustoms itself to
loving the world will receive three gifts in return: worries that will
not quit him, greed that will not forsake him, and aspirations he will
never attain. 3.213 Contentment is kingdom enough. Character is blessing
enough. 3.214 ʿAlī was asked about the meaning of God's words, «We shall
grant him a good life»,2 and he said: A good life is a life of
contentment. 3.215 Partner with the prosperous and win a share of his
riches and luck. 3.216 ʿAlī explained the meaning of God's words, «God
commands justice and good- ness»:3 Justice means balanced behavior.
Goodness means bountiful giving. 3.217 Whoever gives with a constrained
hand will be recompensed by an open one. Raḍī: The meaning of this
saying is that God will recompense whatever a man spends in the way of
charity and benevolence, no matter how little, with a great and abundant
reward. "Hands" refers to "gifts," and ʿAlī differentiates between gifts
given by God's ser- vant and gifts given by the Lord, making one
constrained (lit. short) and the other open (lit. long). God's gifts are
always many times more than the gifts of his creatures. God's gifts are
the source of all gifts---all gifts may be traced back to God's gifts
and originate from them. 3.218 ʿAlī said to his son, Ḥasan: Don't
challenge someone to a duel,4 but if you are challenged, respond, for a
challenger is a traitor, and a traitor will be felled. 1 Reference to
Qurʾan, Jāthiyah 45:9, Baqarah 2:231. 2 Qurʾan, Naḥl 16:97. 3 Qurʾan,
Naḥl 16:90. 4
I.e.,forfrivolousissues.Incontrast,andinagravesituation,ʿAlīhimself
challengedMuʿāwiyah to a duel at Ṣiffīn. Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 387.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 744 Text and
Translation 3.219نبـجلاو وْهَ ّزلا لاجرلا لاصخ رارش ءاسنلا لاصخ رايخ
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو والبخل فإذا كانت المرأة مَزهُوّة لم تمكِّن من نفسها وإذا
كانت بخيلة حفظت مالها ومال ب َ عْلها وإذا كانت جبانة ف َ رِقت من كلّ شيء
يعرض لها. 3.220وقيل له عليه السلام صف لنا العاقل فقال هو الذي يضع الشيء
مواضعه. قيل فصف لنا الجاهل قال قد فعلت. يعني أنّ الجاهل هو الذي لا يضع
الشيء مواضعه فكان ترك صفته صفة له إذا كان بخلاف وصف العاقل. 3.221وقال
عليه السلام: والله لدنياكم هذه أهون في عيني من عِراق خنزير في يد مجذوم.
3.222وقال عليه السلام: إنّ قومًا عبدوا الله رغبة فتلك عبادة التجّار وإنّ
قومًا عبدوا .رارحألا ةدابع كلتف اً ركش هللا اودبع اًموق ّنإو ديبعلا ةدابع
كلتف ةبهر هللا 3.223.اهنم ّدب ال هّنأ اهيف ام ُ ّرشو اهّلكٌّرش ةأرملا
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.224وقال عليه السلام: مَن أطاع التواني ضَيّع الحقوق ومن
أطاع الواشي ضيّع الصديق. 3.225وقال عليه السلام: الحجر الغَص ْ ب في الدار
رَهْن على خرابها. ويروىهذاالكلامللنبيّصل ّ
ىاللهعليهوآلهولاعجبأنيشبهالكلامانفإنّ مُست َ بيلَ قنمامهاق ومَفرغهما من
ذَنوب. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 745
3.219 The best traits of women are the worst traits of men: pride,
cowardice, and stinginess. If a woman is proud, she will not allow a
strange man to touch her. If she is stingy, she will safeguard her
property as well as her husband's. If she is a coward, she will draw
back from dubious invitations. 3.220 People asked ʿAlī, "Describe for us
a man of reason," and he said: One who puts things in their rightful
place. They then asked him, "Describe for us a man of ignorance," and he
replied, "I have already done so." Raḍī: He means that the ignorant man
is one who does not put things in their rightful place, describing him
without actually describing him, for the description of an igno- rant
man is the reverse of the description of a man of reason. 3.221 By God,
this world of yours is worth less in my eyes than the bones of a pig in
the hand of a leper.1 3.222 Some worship God out of desire for his
reward---that is the worship of merchants. Others worship God from fear
of his punishment---that is the wor- ship of slaves. A third group
worship God to give thanks for his favors---that is the worship of the
free! 3.223 Woman is utterly evil, and the evilest thing about her is
that there is no doing without her! 3.224 Whoever bows to languor
squanders rights. Whoever listens to slander squanders friends. 3.225
One stolen brick guarantees a home's destruction.2 Raḍī:This saying is
also attributed to the Prophet---it is no surprise that the two sayings
should resemble each other, for they are drawn from the same well and
poured from the same bucket. 1 Ṣadūq (Amālī, 370) includes the line as
part of the oration in which ʿAlī also exclaims, "This worldof
yoursisworthlesstomethanaleaf beingchompedinthemouthof
alocust,"§1.221.3, which was reportedly delivered in Kufa after the
arbitration in 37/658 (see note at §1.221). 2 Lit. "one stolen stone
(ḥajar)." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 746 Text and
Translation 3.226وقال عليه السلام: يوم المظلوم على الظالم أشدّ من يوم
الظالم على المظلوم. 3.227وقال عليه السلام: اتّقِ الله بعض١ التقى وإن ق َ لّ
وٱجعل بينك وبين الله سِترًا وإن رَق ّ . 3.228وقال عليه السلام: إذا ٱزدحم
الجواب خفي الصواب. 3.229هنع رّصق نمو اهنم هداز هاّدأ نمف ا ً ّقح ةمعن ّلك
يف هلل ّنإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو خاطر بزوال نعمته. 3.230وقال عليه السلام:
إذا كثرت المقدرة قلّت الشهوة. 3.231وقال عليه السلام: احذروا ن ِ فار النِّعم
فما كلّ شارد بمردود. 3.232.مِحَ ّرلا نم فطعأ مركـلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.233وقال عليه السلام: من ظنّ بك خيرًا فصَدِّق ظنّه. 3.234وقال عليه السلام:
أفضل الأعمال ما أكرهت نفسك عليه. 3.235وقال عليه السلام: عرفت ُ الله
سبحانه بفَسْخ العزائم وحَلّ العقود. 3.236وقال عليه السلام: مَرارة الدنيا
حلاوة الآخرة وحلاوة الدنيا مرارة الآخرة. 3.237نع اً هيزنت ةالصلاو كرشلا
نم اًريهطت ناميإلا هللا ضرف :مالسلا هيلع لاقو داهجلاونيدللةيوقت
ّجحلاوقلخلاصالخإلءالتبٱمايصلاوقزرللاً بيبستةاكزلاوربكـلا صَم فورعملاب
رمألاو مالسإلل ا ً ّزع ْ ل َ حة للعوامّ والنهي عن المنكر رَدْعًا للسفهاء
وصلة ١ش،ي،ھ،ونسخةفين:كذا.أصلن: ⟩حقّ ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 747 3.226 Thedayof
theoppressedovertheoppressorwillbeharsherthantheday of the oppressor
over the oppressed.1 3.227 Fear God, even if just a smidgen. Draw a
curtain between you and God, even if almost sheer. 3.228 Too many
answers obscure the answer. 3.229 God is due a share from your every
blessing. If you render it to him, you are rewarded with more. If you
fall short, you risk losing the original one. 3.230 When opportunity
increases, desire decreases. 3.231
Bewarelestblessingsabscond,fornoteveryrunawaycamelcanberecov- ered.
3.232 Generosity produces more affection than kinship does. 3.233 If
someone thinks you are good, prove them right!2 3.234 The most virtuous
deeds are those you force yourself to do. 3.235 I recognized the hand of
God through broken resolves and dissolved compacts! 3.236 Bitterness in
this world leads to sweetness in the next, sweetness in this world leads
to bitterness in the next. 3.237 Godhasmandatedbelief
topurifyyoufrompolytheism,theritualprayer to repulse pride, the
alms-levy to draw in sustenance, fasting to test people's sincerity, the
hajj to strengthen faith, jihad to fortify Islam, the commanding of good
for the public's benefit, the forbidding of evil to restrain fools, and
the fostering of relatives to increase numbers. He has mandated fair
retribution to prevent bloodshed, criminal penalties to emphasize the
gravity of his prohibi- tions, abstention from wine-drinking to preserve
reason, desisting from thiev- ery to promote temperance, refraining from
fornication to safeguard lineage, 1 §3.326 is similar. 2 From ʿAlī's
lengthy testament of counsel for Ḥasan (§2.31), written in Ḥāḍirīn after
leaving Ṣiffīn in 37/657. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 748 Text and
Translation برشكرتومراحمللاًماظعإدودحلاةماقإوءامدللاً
نْقَحصاصقلاوددعللةامْنَممحرلا ِّللا كرتو بسنلل اً نيصحت انزلا كرتو ةّفِعلل
اًباجيإ ةقرسلا ةبناجمو لقعلل اً نيصحت رمخلا واط تكثيرًا للنسل والشهادات
ٱستظهارًا على المُجاحدات وترك الـكذب تشريفًا للصدق والسلام أمانًا من المَخاوف
والإمامة١ نظامًا للأمّة والطاعة تعظيمًا للإمامة. 3.238وكان عليه السلام يقول
أَحْل ِ فواالظالمإذاأردتميمينهبأنّه⟩بريءٌمنحولاللهوقوّته⟨فإنّهإذاحلفبهاكاذبًا
عوجِل وإذا حلف بـ⟩الله الذي لا إل ٰ ه إلّا هو⟨لم يعاجَل لأنّه قد وَحّده
سبحانه. 3.239لَمعُ ينأرثؤتامكلاميفلمعٱوكسفن ّيصونكمدآنبٱاي:مالسلاهيلعلاقو
فيه مِن بعدك. 3.240هنونجفمدنيملنإفمدنياهبحاص ّنألنونُ
جلانمبرضةّدِحلا:مالسلاهيلعلاقو مُستحكِم. 3.241وقال عليه السلام: صحّة الجسد من
قل ّ ة الحسد. 3.242ّيعَخَ ّنلا دايز نب ليَ مُكل مالسلا هيلع لاقو ُ يو مراكملا
بْسَك يف ٢اوحورَ ي نأ كلهأ رُم ليمك اي دلِ جوا في حاجة من هو نائم فوالذي
رورسلا كلذ نم هل هللا قلخو اّلإ اًرورس اً بلق عدوأ دحأ نم ام تاوصألل هعمس
عسو لطفًا فإذا نزلت به نائبة جرى إليها كالماء في ٱنحداره حتّى ي َ طر ُ دها
عنهكما ت ُ طرد غريبة الإبل. ١ش،ن،ي،ھ،
)أيجميعالمخطوطاتالرئيسيّةماعدامالتيتفقدهذهالصفحة(،ل،ز،ق، .ً ادمع ام ٍنمز
يف ترّيُ غ اهنأ ودبيو ،⟨ةنامألا⟩ :ق ،ش يف ةحّحصمو ،چ ،س .اذك :ك ،ت ،آ
٢ش،ھ،ومصحّحةفين،ونسخةفيي:كذا.أصلي،ويبدوأصلن: ⟩يرجوا⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 749 refraining from sodomy to ensure an abundance of
offspring, and the giving of testimony to curb false denials. He has
mandated refraining from untruth to honor truth, and a plainly voiced
peace-greeting to protect against fear. He has mandated the Imamate as a
system of governance for the community,1 and obedience to the Imam to
show the Imamate's lofty status. 3.238 When a criminal takes the oath at
his testimony, have him swear that if he lies, he will be cut loose from
God's strength and power. Then, if he lies, God will punish him soon.
Whereas if he swears by God, there is no god but He, his punishment will
be delayed because he has acknowledged the oneness of the Almighty.
3.239 Son of Adam, execute your own will. Do with your property now what
you wish to be done with it after you are gone. 3.240 Rage is a kind of
madness, and the perpetrator repents. If he does not repent, his madness
still rages. 3.241 Health increases when envy decreases. 3.242 ʿAlī said
to Kumayl ibn Ziyād al-Nakhaʿī: Kumayl, teach your children to venture
out every morning to perform noble deeds, and to go out every night to
ease people's travails while they sleep. I swear by the one whose
hearing encompasses all sounds, that if anyone puts a bit of joy in
another's heart, God creates a grace from that joy---then, if ever a
calamity descends upon him, that grace flows to him like streaming
water, driving away the calamity like a herdsman driving away
trespassing camels. 1 Thus in all my primary manuscripts. The word
"Imamate (imāmah)" is substituted in later manuscripts with the word
"trust (amānah)," which could be a deliberate corruption. See details in
my Note on the Edition and Translation: Previous Editions (p. 48).
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 750 Text and
Translation 3.243وقال عليه السلام: إذا أملقتم فتاجِروا الله بالصدقة.
3.244وقالعليهالسلام:الوفاءلأهلالغدرغدرعنداللهوالغدربأهلالغدروفاءعند
الله. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 751
3.243 If ever you fall into penury, make a deal with God by offering
alms to the poor. 3.244 Loyalty toward people of deception counts with
God as deception. De- ception toward people of deception counts with God
as loyalty. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 752 Text and
Translation فصل نذ ريسفتلا ىلإ جاتحملا همالك بيرغ رايتخٱ نم اً ئيش هيف رك
3.245في حديثه عليه السلام فإذا كان ذلك ضَرب ي َ عسوب َ زَ ق عمتجي امكهيلإ
نوعمتجيف هبَنذب نيدلا ُ ع الخريف. ⟩يعسوب الدين⟨السيّد العظيم المالك لأمور
الناس يومئذ و⟩القزع⟨قِطَع الغَيم التي لا ماء فيها. 3.246في حديثه عليه
السلام .حَشْح َ ّشلا بيطخلا اذه يريد الماهر بالخطبة الماضي فيها وكلّ ماضٍ في
كلام أو سير فهو ⟩شحشح⟨. والشحشح في غير هذا الموضع البخيل الممسك. 3.247في
حديثه عليه السلام إنّ للخصومة قُح َ مًا. يريد بـ⟩القحم⟨الم َ هالك لأنّها ت ُ
قحم أصحابها في الم َ ْ حُق كلذ نمو .رثكألا يف فلاتَ ملاو كلاه مة وهو رخآ
هجو هيف ليقو .مهيف اهمّحقت كلذف مهلاومأ قَ ّرعتتف ةن َ ّسلا مهبيصت نأ وهو
بارعَألا أنّها ت ُ قحمهم بلادَالرّيف أي تُحوِجهم إلى دخول الح َ ضَر عند مُحول
الب َ دو. 3.248في حديثه عليه السلام إذا بلغ النساء ن َ ص ّ الحقائق
فالعصبة أولى. ويروى ⟩ن َ ص ّ الحِقاق⟨. و⟩النص ّ ⟨منتهى الأشياء ومبلغ
أقصاها كالنص ّ في السير لأنّه أقصى ماتقدرعليهالدابّةوتقول⟩ن َ صَص ْ ت ُ
الرجلَعنالأمر⟨إذاٱستقصيتمسألتهعنهلتستخرجما al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 753 Section on Rare Words A selection from ʿAlī's sayings
that need lexical explanations 3.245 When that happens, religion's queen
bee will rest its abdomen on the ground, and people will gather around
it like puffs of cloud gathering rapidly in autumn.1 Raḍī: "Religion's
queen bee (yaʿsūb al-dīn)" denotes the great leader who will rule peo-
ple's affairs on that day. "Puffs (quzaʿ)" are wisps of waterless
clouds. 3.246 This swift-tongued orator.2 Raḍī: ʿAlī means someone who
is skilled and adept in oratory. A man who is adept in speech or travel
is called "swift (shaḥshaḥ)." Shaḥshaḥin other contexts can also mean
stingy and tight-fisted. 3.247 Quarrels are bucking steeds that hurl
their riders into perils.3 Raḍī: By "hurling into perils (quḥam)," ʿAlī
means into pits of death, because quarrels often fling their riders into
pits of death and perdition. The similar phrase, "the peril into which
the Bedouin are hurled (quḥmat al-aʿrāb)," denotes a year when drought
strikes the Bedouin and emaciates their herds; that is what drought's
bucking with them means. The latter phrase is alternatively explained as
the desert's hurling the Bedouin into farmlands, meaning that it forces
them to enter settled locales when their nomadic pastures dry up. 3.248
When a girl enters the life-phase of a three-year-old camel, her
paternal relatives have greater right over her guardianship.
Raḍī:Thephraseisalsonarratedasnaṣṣal-ḥiqāq,insteadof naṣṣal-ḥaqāʾiq.
Naṣṣmeans the limit of things and their ultimate reach, like the limit
in traveling, because that is the farthest a camel can go. You say "I
pressed the man to the limit about that matter" 1 Explained as a
prophecy about the Messiah (Mahdī) coming at the end of time. "Resting
its abdomen on the ground" refers to the establishment of his rule. R
3:362--363; Ḥ19:104--105. 2
ʿAlīispraising(1)ṢaʿṣaʿahibnṢūḥān(Ḥ19:106);or(2),anunnamedyoungoratorfromthetribe
of Qays, just before the Battle of the Camel outside Basra in 36/656
(Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:492). 3
WhenappointinghisnephewʿAbdallāhibnJaʿfarashisdeputyinresolvingadispute.Ḥ19:107.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 754 Text and
Translation عندهفيهفـ⟩ـنص ّ الحقاق⟨يريدبهالإدراكلأنّهمنتهىالص
ِّغَروالوقتالذييخرجمنهالصغير إلى حدّ الـكبير وهو من أفصح الكنايات عن هذا
الأمر وأغربها يقول فإذا بلغ النساء ذلك فالعصبة أولى بالمرأة من أمّها إذا
كانوا مَحر َ مًا مثل الإخوة والأعمام وبتزويجها إن أرادوا ذلك.
و⟩الحِقاق⟨مُحاقّةالأمّللعصبةفيالمرأةوهوالجدالوالخصومةوقولكلّ
واحدمنهماللآخرأنا صن⟩ ّنإ ليق دقو .اًلادج هتلداج لثم⟨اً قاقِح هتققاح⟩ هنم
لاقيو اذهب كنم ّقحأ ّ الحقاق⟨
بلوغالعقلوهوالإدراكلأنّهعليهالسلامأرادمنتهىالأمرالذييجببهالحقوقوالأحكام.
ومنرواه⟩نص ّ الحقائق⟨فإنّماأرادجمع⟩حقيقة⟨.هذامعنىماذ
كرهأبوعُبيدالقاسمبنسلّام. والذي عندي أنّ المراد بـ⟩ـنص ّ الحقاق⟨هاهنا بلوغ
المرأة إلى الحدّ الذي يجوز فيه تزويجها ثالث لمكتسٱ يذلا وهو ّقِحو ةّقِح عمج
يهو لبإلا نم قاقحلاب اً هيبشت اهقوقح يف اهفّرصتو سنين ودخل في الرابعة وعند
ذلك يبلغ إلى الحدّ الذي يتمكّن فيه من ركوب ظهره ونص ّ ه في
السير.و⟩الحقائق⟨أيضًاجمعحِقّة.فالروايتانجميعًاترجعانإلىمعنىواحدوهذاأشبهبطريقة
العرب من المعنى المذ كور أوّلًا. 3.249في حديثه عليه السلام .ةظْمُ ّللا
تدادزٱ ناميإلا دادزٱ امّلك بلقلا يفًةَظْمُ ل ودبي ناميإلا ّنإ
⟩اللمظة⟨مثلالنكتةأونحوهامنالبياض.ومنهقيل ⟩فرسأَلْمَظ⟨إذاكانبج َ حفَلتهشيءمن
البياض. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 755
if you pushed him on a question to extract all the information that he
had about it. Naṣṣal-ḥiqāq means reaching physical maturity, because
that is the limit of childhood, the point at which a child becomes an
adult. This is among the most eloquent and marvelous of expressions that
connote this transformation. ʿAlī is saying: When a girl reaches that
stage, her paternal relatives---close blood relatives such as brothers
and uncles---have a greater right to her than her mother does, and they
have a right to con- tract the girl's marriage if they choose to do so.
Ḥiqāq is the dispute (muḥāqqah) in which the mother engages against the
girl's paternal relatives, i.e., the clash and the quarrel, each of the
two parties saying to the other, "I have more right (anā aḥaqq) in this
matter than you." From this comes the phrase, "I contested with him for
a right (ḥāqaqtuhu ḥiqāqan)," which is similar to, "I disputed with him
( jādaltuhu jidālan)." It is also said that naṣṣal-ḥiqāq refers to the
development of the mind, and that is what is meant by maturity, because
ʿAlī meant the final stage of mental development, after which an
individual can be trusted to look after her own rights and obligations.
As for those who narrate the phrase with the variant naṣṣal-ḥaqāʾiq,
they take ḥaqāʾiq to be the plural of ḥaqīqah (a reality).The above
paragraph constitutes Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim ibn Sallām's explanation of
the phrase.1 In my view, what is meant here by the phrase naṣṣal-ḥiqāq
is a woman's reaching the stage at which she can be married and when she
can be allowed to administer her own rights. ʿAlī compares young women
at that stage to ḥiqāq, the plural of ḥiqqah and of ḥiqq, namely, a
camel that has ended three years and begun its fourth. At this age, its
back is strong enough to ride, and it can be pushed hard on a journey.
The word in the variant narration, ḥaqāʾiq, is also a plural of ḥiqqah,
and thus, both variants in the narration have the same meaning. This
explana- tionconformsbetterwiththewaysof
theArabsthanthefirstonegivenbyAbūʿUbayd.2 3.249 Faith begins as a
shining spot in the heart. As faith increases, the light expands. Raḍī:
"A shining spot (lumẓah)" is a fleck of white or something like a fleck.
From this comes the phrase "a horse with a shining spot ( farasun
almaẓ)," when it has a fleck of white on its lip. 1 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb
al-ḥadīth, s.v. "Ḥ-Q-Q." 2 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ19:109--110) also finds
problems with Abū ʿUbayd's grammatical and lex- ical parsing. He prefers
Raḍī's explanations overall, but corrects the last part, saying that the
Arabic word ḥaqāʾiq is the "plural of the plural" ( jamʿ al-jamʿ) of
ḥiqqah, the plural being ḥiqāq. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 756 Text and
Translation 3.250في حديثه عليه السلام .هضبق اذإ ىضم امِ ل هيّكزُ ي نأ هيلع
بجي نون َ ّظلا ني َ ّدلا هل ناك اذإ لجرلا ّنإ فـ⟩ـالظنون⟨الذي لا يعلم
صاحبه أيقبضه من الذي هو عليه أم لا فكأنّه الذي يظنّ به فمرّة
يرجوهومرّةلايرجوه.وهومنأفصحالكلام.و كذلككلّ أمرتطالبهولاتدريعلىأي ّ شيء
أنت منه فهو ⟩ظَنون⟨. ومن ذلك قول الأعشى١ مَا يُجْعَلُ الج ُ يِذَ ّ لا ُنوُ ن َ
ّظلا ُ ّد جُنِّب َ صَوْب بِج َ ّللا َ ٖرِطاَ ملا ِ ـِ تاَ رُفلا َلْثِم ـَم اَذ ِإ ِّيـ
ـا طَمـ ـا ي َ قْـ ـذِف ُ بِالب ُ وْصِـ ٖرِهاَ ملاَو ِّيـ و⟩الجدّ⟨البئر
و⟩الظنون⟨التي لا ي ُ درى هل فيها ماء أم لا. 3.251لاقف هيزغُ ي اًشيج عّيش
هّنأ مالسلا هيلع هثيدح يف أَعذِبوا عن النساء ما ٱستطعتم. ومعناه ٱصدفوا عن ذ
َ ي كلذ ّنأل ّنهل ةبراقُ ملا نم اوعنتمٱو ّنهب بلقلا لغشو ءاسنلا رك فُت ّ
في نم ّلكو.وزَغلايفداعبإلانعتِفلَ
يووْدَعلانعرسكيوةميزعلادقاعَميفحدقيوةّيمحلادضع ٱمتنع من شيء فقد أعذب عنه
والعاذب والعَذوب الممتنع من الأكل والشرب. 3.252في حديثه عليه السلام
كالياس ِ .هحادِق نم ةزوف َلّوأ رظتنَ ي جـِ لافلا ر ١البحر:السريع. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 757
3.250 If a man recovers a dubious debt, he should pay any past levies
due on it. Raḍī: A "dubious (ẓanūn)" debt is one whose owner is not sure
whether he will recover it from the borrower or not. He vacillates, at
one point hopeful, and at another losing heart. This is among the most
eloquent of expressions. Similarly, everything you seek but do not know
where you stand regarding it is "dubious." Aʿshā's verses are relevant
to this explanation:1 The dubious well That the thunder clouds pass by
Is not the surging Euphrates Which tosses ship and captain. "Well (
judd)" means a borehole, and "dubious (ẓanūn)" describes a well which
one cannot be certain contains water. 3.251 As ʿAlī bade farewell to a
military contingent he was sending on a raid, he said to them: Abstain
as much as possible from the sweetness of women. Raḍī: This means desist
from brooding over your women and occupying your hearts with thoughts
about them; do not have intimacy with them either. These things damp- en
zeal, undo the knots of resolve, delay expeditious travel, and distract
from com- mitted fighting. A person who refrains from something has
"desisted from it (aʿdhaba ʿanhu)."2 "A person who desists (ʿādhib or
ʿadhūb)" is one who refrains from eating and drinking. 3.252 Like the
successful gambler who awaits his first winning arrow.3 1 Aʿshā, Dīwān,
141, verses 19--20. 2 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ19:114) agrees with Raḍī's
explanation overall, but he says the verb in this explanatory phrase
should be in Form i (ʿadhaba), not Form iv (aʿdhaba). 3 Part of oration
§1.23 (see context and note on drawing arrows to divide camel meat
there). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 758 Text and
Translation ⟩َ لَ ف دق⟩ لاقي بلاغلا رهاقلا⟨جلافلا⟩و .روزَ جلا ىلع حادقلاب
نوبراضتي نيذلا مه⟨نورسايلا جَ َ لَ فو مهيلع جَهم⟨وقال الراجز ⟩لـ َ لاَ ف
ُتْيَأَر ا َ ّم َ ق اً ج ِ َ لَ ف ْد جا⟨. 3.253في حديثه عليه السلام ّ
لصهللالوسربانيقّتٱسأبلاّرمحٱاذإاّ نك ىاللهعليهوآلهفلميكنمنّاأقربإلىالعدوّمنه.
ومعنى ذلك أنّه إذا عظم الخوف من العدوّ وٱشتدّ عِضاض الحرب فزع المسلمون إلى
قتال هيلع هلوقو .هناكمب هنوفاخي اوناك اّمم نونمأيو مهيلع رصنلا ىلاعت هللا
لزنُ يف هسفنب هللا لوسر السلام ⟩إذا ٱحمرّالبأس⟨كناية عن ٱشتداد الأمر. وقد
قيل في ذلك أقوال أحسنها أنّه شبّه حَمْيَ الحرب بالنار التي تجمع الحرارة
والحمرة بفعلها ولونها. وممّا يقوّي ذلك قول النبيّ صل ّ ى الله َ لَ
تجُمىأردقوهلآوهيلع دالناسيومحُنينوهيحربهَوازِن ⟩الآنَحَمِيَ الوَطِيس⟨والوطيس مُستوق
َ د النار فشبّه صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ما ٱستحرّمن جِلاد القوم بٱحتدام النار
وشدّة ٱلتهابها. انقضى هذا الفصل ورجعنا إلى سَنن الغرض الأوّل في هذا الباب.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 759
Raḍī: "Gamblers (yāsirūn)" are those who draw arrows to divide a
slaughtered camel's meat. A "successful ( fālij)" person is one who
conquers and is victorious. It is said, "He was victorious over them (
falaja ʿalayhim)" or "He successfully overpowered them ( falajahum)." A
rajaz-poet has said, ⟨When I saw a successful man who was victorious (
fālijan qad falajā).⟩1 3.253 When the fighting raged red-hot, we would
seek help from the Messen- ger, and when that happened, no one engaged
the enemy more closely than he did. Raḍī:This means that when fear of
the enemy was greatest and the battle sank its teeth into us, the
Muslims beseeched help from God's Messenger, who then entered the fray
in person. When that happened, God sent them victory and they were
secured against what they had feared, because of the Messenger's
closeness to God. ʿAlī's words, "When the fighting raged red-hot (idhā
ḥmarra l-baʾs)," connotes the severity of the battle. Many explanations
have been given for this metaphor, and the best of them holds that ʿAlī
compared the heat of battle to fire because it combines burning and
redness, thus, action and color.This explanation is supported by some
words the Prophet spoke when he observed the impassioned fighting
against the Hawāzin in the Battle of Ḥunayn: ⟨Now the furnace burns
(al-āna ḥamiya l-waṭīs)!⟩2 A furnace is the place where fire is stoked,
and the Prophet compared the heat of the fighting to the flames of a
fire and its intense blaze. The section on rare words ends here. We
return now to the chapter's original thread. 1 Rajaz is a poetic meter
used, in pre-Islamic and early Islamic times, for spontaneous verse
recited in battle or otherwise, in the form mustafʿilun mustafʿilun
mustafʿilun. The line is grammatically incomplete, and the second
hemistich is not recorded in the commentaries. I have not been able to
identify the poet: the line is not in the published Dīwāns of the famous
Umayyad rajaz poets ʿAjjāj (d. ca. 90/715) or his son Ruʾbah
(d. 145/762). 2 Hadith cited by Suyūṭī, Jāmiʿ, §3012. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 760 Text and
Translation 3.254ىتأىّتحاً يشامهسفنبجرخفرابنألاىلعةيواعمباحصأةراغإهغلباّ
ملمالسلاهيلعلاقو ردأف ةليَخُ ّنلا كه الناس وقالوا يا أمير المؤمنين نحن
نكفيكهم فقال عليه السلام والله ما تكفونني أنفسكم فكيف تكفونني غير كم إن
كانت الرعايا قبلي لتشكو حَيف رُعاتهافإن ّ ياليوملأشكوحَيفرعيّتيكأن ّ يالم َ
قودوهمالقادةأوالموزوعوهمالوَزَعة. فلمّا قال هذا القول في كلام طويل قد ذ
كرنا مختاره في جملة الخطب تقدّم إليه رجلان من ِ لْمَأ ال يِّ ن ِإ﴿ امهدحأ
لاقف هباحصأ َ ن َ ّ ال ِإ ُك فْسِي وَأَخِي﴾فم ُ رنا بأمرك يا أمير المؤمنين
نَنْفُذ له فقال عليه السلام وأين تقعان ممّا أريد. 3.255ىلع اوناك لمجلا باحصأ
ّنظأ ينارُ تأ لاقف مالسلا هيلع هاتأ طوَح نب ثراحلا ّنإ ليقو ضلالة فقال
عليه السلام al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 761
3.254 When news reached ʿAlī that Muʿāwiyah's militia had raided Anbar,
he stormed from the town and walked all the way to Nukhaylah. People
caught up with him there and entreated him, "Stay back, Commander of the
Faithful, let us take care of them for you!" He exclaimed:1 By God, you
are not even able to protect me against yourselves, how will you protect
me against others? In the past, people used to complain of the injustice
of their rulers. I complain of the injustice wrought by my subjects! I
seem to be the one being led, they the leaders. I seem to be the one
under command, they the commanders. Raḍī: When ʿAlī spoke these
lines---followed by a long oration (of which a selection is included in
our chapter on orations)2---two men from among his supporters stepped
forward, and one of them declared, "«I have jurisdiction only over
myself and my brother»3 so give us your command, Commander of the
Faithful, and we shall execute it forthwith." ʿAlī replied, "What can
the two of you accomplish? You are far short of what I need!" 3.255 It
is narrated that al-Ḥārith ibn Ḥawṭcame to ʿAlī and challenged him, "Are
you asking me to believe that the people who fought you at the Battle of
the Camel were misguided?" ʿAlī replied:4 1 In 39/660, led by Sufyān ibn
ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī, in which he killed ʿAlī's governor, Ḥassān al- Bakrī.
After the event described in our text, ʿAlī set up camp at Nukhaylah,
preparing to march against Muʿāwiyah, but when evening came, most people
returned to Kufa and ʿAlī was left with only his family and a handful of
his staunch supporters, and he was forced to return to Kufa (F 443).
ʿAlī's oration at Nukhaylah is recorded in §1.27. 2 §1.27, §1.94.1. 3
Qurʾan, Māʾidah 5:25. 4 Ḥārith ibn Ḥawṭchallenged ʿAlī thus while
orating on the pulpit, presumably in Kufa, before marching to Ṣiffīn in
36/356. Jāḥiẓ, Bayān, 3:211. There are various speculations about
Ḥārith's father's name, which indicate that Ḥārith was not well known.
Most likely the name is "Ḥawṭ," following mss Sh and N, and the
commentaries R 3:374, and Ḥ19:147, 148, as well as Jāḥiẓ, Bayān, 3:211,
who adds "al-Laythī." R 3:368 and Ḥ19:148 also record the variant
"Khūṭ," and state that Raḍī wrote the name thus in his own hand, "with
the letter 'Kh', dotted, and vocal- izedas 'ū'
(khāʾmuʿjamahmaḍmūmah)."msYsaysthesame,but adds thatthe correctspelling
according to the hadith scholars, however, is "Ḥawṭ." Other variants of
the name are "Ḥawt" and "Ḥūt" (B 993). al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 762 Text
and Translation ترُ جف كقوف رظنت ملو كتحت ترظن كّنإ ِراح اي َ إنّك لم تعرف
الحقّ فتعرف من أباه١ ولم تعرف الباطل فتعرف من أتاه. فقال الحارث فإن ّ ي
أعتزل مع سعد بن مالك وعبد الله بن عمر فقال عليه السلام إنّ سعدًا وعبد الله
بن عمر لم ينصرا الحقّ ولم يخذلا الباطل. 3.256َ بغُ ي دسألا بكارك ناطلسلا
بحاص :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ط بموقعه وهو أعلم بموضعه. 3.257وقال عليه السلام:
أحسنوا في عَقِب غير كم تُحفَظوا في عقبكم. 3.258وقال عليه السلام: إنّ كلام
الحكماء إذا كان صوابًا كان دواء وإذا كان خطأ كان داء. 3.259وسأله عليه
السلام رجل أن يعرّفه ما الإيمان فقال إذاكانغ َ
دٌفأتنيحتّىأُخبركعلىأسماعالناسفإننسيتمقالتيحفظهاعليكغيرك فإنّ الكلام
كالشاردة يَثقَفها هذا ويُخطئها هذا. وقدذ
كرناماأجابهبهعليهالسلامفيماتقدّممنهذاالبابوهوقوله⟩الإيمانعلىأربعشعب⟨.
3.260يذلا كموي ىلع كتأي مل يذلا كموي ّمه لمحَ ت ال مدآ نبٱ اي :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو أتاك فإنّه إن يكُ من عمرك يأت الله فيه برزقك.
١ش،ن،ھ:كذا.ي،وتبدومصحّحةفيش: ⟩فتعرفأهله⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 763 Ḥārith, you have looked below you and not above you,
which is why you have strayed.1 You haven't recognized right, else you
would have recognized its deniers, and you haven't recognized wrong,
else you would have recognized its perpetrators. Raḍī: Ḥārith responded,
"I will sit out the fighting, alongside Saʿd ibn Mālik and ʿAbdal- lāh
ibn ʿUmar,"2 and ʿAlī exclaimed: But Saʿd and ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar
refused to aid right or fight wrong! 3.256 A ruler rides a lion. People
envy his status, but he knows his situation. 3.257 Be kind to orphans,
and others will care for yours.3 3.258 When the learned speak truth,
their words heal. When they speak false- hoods, they cause disease.
3.259 A man asked ʿAlī to define faith for him, and ʿAlī directed him:4
Come back tomorrow and I will inform you when others are present to hear
me. Then, if you forget my words, others will remember them. Words are
like runaway camels---this person catches them, another person loses
them. Raḍī: I have recorded the answer ʿAlī gave to this man in a text
earlier in this chapter, which begins, "Faith has four branches."5 3.260
Son of Adam, add not the worries of a day that has yet to arrive to the
burdens of the day that is here! If your lifespan extends to tomorrow,
God will provide sustenance.6 1 The line is interpreted as follows: (1)
You have followed those who broke the pledge of allegiance at the Battle
of the Camel and not followed your rightful Imam (B 993); or, (2) you
have followed the Syrians and Muʿāwiyah and not the majority of the
Prophet's Com- panions (F 443). Yā Ḥāri (O Ḥārith), with the final
letter "Th" dropped, is the apocopated (murakhkham) form of the
vocative, Yā Ḥārith. 2 Saʿd ibn Mālik is better known as Saʿd ibn Abī
Waqqāṣ. 3 Ibn ʿAsākir (Tārīkh, 42:497--498) places this line within
oration §1.63, that ʿAlī delivered in Ṣiffīn, in 37/657. 4
ExcerptfromorationthatʿAlīdeliveredinhishome,eitherinMedinaorKufa,additionalparts
of which are as §1.69, §1.103 (details in note), §3.26. 5 §3.26. 6
Similar lines in §3.358. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 764 Text and
Translation 3.261وقال عليه السلام: أَحبِب حبيبك هَونًا ما عسى أن يكون ب َ
غيضك يومًا ما وأبغض بغيضك هونًا ما عسى أن يكون حبيبك يومًا ما. 3.262وقال
عليه السلام: الناس في الدنيا عاملان عامل في الدنيا للدنيا قد شغلته دنياه
عن آخرته يخشى على من يُخلِّ ف الفقر ويأمَنه على نفسه في ُ فني عمره في منفعة
غيره. وعامل عمل في الدنيا لما بعدها فجاءه الذي له من الدنيا بغير عمل
فأحرز الح َ اًعم ني َ ّظ .هعنميف ةجاح هللا لأسي ال هللا دنع اً هيجَو حبصأف
اًعيمج نيرادلا كلمو 3.263ورُوي أنّه ذُ كر عند عمر بن الخطّاب في أيّامه حُليّ
الـكعبة وكثرته فقال قوم لو أخذت َ ه فجهّزت َ به جيوش المسلمين كان أعظم
للأجر وما تصنع الـكعبة بالحليّ فهَمّ عمر بذلك وسأل عنه أميرَالمؤمنين عليه
السلام فقال إنّ القرآن أُنزل على النبيّ عليه السلام والأموالُ أربعة أموال
المسلمين فقسمها بين هعضو ثيح هللا هعضوف سْمُ خلاو هيّقحتسم ىلع همسقف ءيَفلاو
ضئارفلا يف ةثرولا والصدقات فجعلها الله حيث جعلها. وكان حليّ الـكعبة فيها
يومئذ فتر كه الله على حاله ولم يتر كه نِسيانًا ولم يَخْف َ عليه مكانًا فأقِرّه
حيث أقرّه الله ورسوله. فقال عمر لولاك لٱفتضحنا وترك الحليّبحاله. 3.264ورُوي
أنّه عليه السلام رُفع إليه رجلان سرقا من مال الله أحدهما عبدٌ من مال الله
والآخَر مِن عُرْض الناس فقال عليه السلام أمّا هذا فهو من مال الله ولا حدّ عليه
مال الله أكل بعضُه بعضًا وأمّا الآخَر فعليه الحدّ. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 765 3.261 Love your friend but hold back some---someday he
could be your foe. Hate your foe but hold back some---someday he could
be your friend.1 3.262 Those who labor in this world are of two kinds.
The first is a man who labors in this world for this world.This world
has distracted him from the here- after. He fears leaving his family
without means but thinks himself safe from want, and he uses his life
only to provide profit to others. The second is a man who labors in this
world for the hereafter and this world's benefits come to him without
effort. He wins both fortunes and secures both abodes. He has earned a
place of honor in God's eyes---whatever he asks for, God grants him.
3.263 It has been narrated that the many precious objects inside the
Kaʿbah were
broughttoʿUmaribnal-Khaṭṭāb'sattention,andsomeonesuggestedtohim,"Whydon't
you sell these ornaments to equip the Muslim armies? That would win you
greater reward from God, for what does the Kaʿbah want with jewels!" The
idea appealed to ʿUmar, and he asked the Commander of the Faithful for
his opinion---ʿAlī replied:2 At the time when the Qurʾan was revealed to
the Prophet, there were four kinds of property: property that belonged
to Muslims that the Prophet distributed among their heirs according to
the mandated shares; war gains that he dis- tributed to whomever they
accrued; the fifth share that God assigned where he did; and the
alms-levy that he allocated where he did. These precious objects were
present then inside the Kaʿbah, and God left them as they were. It was
not that he forgot to legislate about them, nor was their presence
unknown to him---you too must keep them where God and his Prophet kept
them. ʿUmar exclaimed, "But for you, I would have been disgraced!" and
he left the precious objects as they were. 3.264 It is narrated that two
men who had stolen from the public treasury were brought before ʿAlī.
One was a slave, himself belonging to the public treasury, and the other
was a member of the public. ʿAlī pronounced:3 As for this one, he comes
from God's treasury and no corporal punishment accrues to him. In his
case, part of God's property consumed another part of God's property.
The other, however, is warranted the criminal penalty. 1
ReportedlyspokenonthedaythatʿUthmānwaskilled,inMedinain35/656.Balādhurī,
Ansāb, 5:588. 2 Presumably in Medina, sometime during ʿUmar's caliphate,
13--23/634--644. 3 Presumably in Kufa, sometime during ʿAlī's caliphate,
35--40/656--661. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 766 Text and
Translation فقطع يده. 3.265وقال عليه السلام: لو قد ٱستوت قدماي من هذه
الم َ ترّيغَ ل ضِحاد ُ أشياء. 3.266هتليح تمظع نإو دبعلل لعجي مل هللا ّنأ اً
نيقي اً ملع اوملعا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ قو هتبِ لَط تّدتشٱو وِيَت مَكيدته أكثر
ممّا سُمّي له في الذ كر الحكيم ولم يحل بين العبد في ضعفهوقل ّ
ةحيلتهوبينأنيبلغماسمّيلهفيالذ كرالحكيموالعارفلهذاالعاملبهأعظم الناس راحة
في منفعة والتارك له الشاكّ فيه أعظم الناس شغل ً ا في مَضَرّة ورُب ٍمَعنُم َ ّ
عليهمَستدرَجبالنعمىورُب رّصقوكركشيفعمتسملااهّيأ ْدِزفىولبلابهلعونصمىلتبُم َ ّ
.كقزر ىهتنم دنع فِقو كِتَ لَ جَع نم 3.267وقال عليه السلام: لا تجعلوا علمكم
جهل ً اذإو اولمعٱف متملع اذإ ا ً ّكش مكنيقيو ا تيقّنتم فأقدموا. 3.268وقال
عليه السلام: إنّ الطمع مُورد غير مُصدر وضامن غير وَفيّ. وربّما ش َ رِق َ شارب
الماء قبل رِيِّ ه وكلّما عظم قدر الشيء المتناف َ س فيه عظمت الرزيّة لفقده
ظحلاو رئاصبلا نيعأ يمعُ ت ّينامألاو ّ يأتي مَن لا يأتيه.
3.269وقالعليهالسلام:اللّٰهمّ إن ّ يأعوذبكأنتَحسُنفيلامعةالعيونعلانيتيوت َ قب
َ ح فيماأُبطِنُ لكسريرتيمحافظًاعلىرياءالناسمننفسيبجميعماأنتمُطّلـِـععليهمنّي ُ
عابتو كدابع ىلإ اًب ُ ّرقت يلمع ءوسب كيلإ يضفأو يرهاظ نسح سانلل يدبُأف دًا
من مَرضاتك. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 767
Accordingly, he ordered the second thief's hand to be cut off. 3.265 If
my feet had gained a foothold on this slippery path, I would have
changed many things. 3.266 People, know with full certainty that God
never gives to any of his servants---no matter how great his intrigues,
how intense his passions, or how strong his maneuvers---more than what
is ordained for him in the Wise Remembrance.1 God also never withholds
from any of his servants---no matter how weak his form, or how paltry
his wiles---what is ordained for him in the
WiseRemembrance.Thepersonwhorecognizesthistruthandactsonitenjoys the
greatest comfort and the most abundant gains. The person who rejects and
doubts it is beset with the greatest preoccupations and much harm. Some
who have been given many blessings are deceived by their blessings.
Others who are burdened with many afflictions are given much good
through their trials. So multiply your thanks, O listener, and lessen
your haste. Do not stretch your hand beyond your share of sustenance.
3.267 Don't exchange knowledge for ignorance or certainty for doubt. If
you have knowledge, then act. If you are certain, go forward. 3.268
Greed drives people to the pools of death, from which there is no
return, and it promises success but breaks its pledge---a man drinking
water could choke before his thirst is quenched. Moreover, the greater
the value of a thing, the greater the grief over its loss. Desire blinds
the eyes of the discerning, while fortune comes to those who don't chase
after it. 3.269 God, I seek refuge in you! Let me not present a
beautiful appearance to people's eyes, while concealing from you an ugly
heart. Let me not try to save face before them, when you know everything
about me. Let me not show a beautiful form to them, while approaching
you with wicked deeds. Let me not seek closeness to your servants, while
distancing myself from your pleasure.2 1 The Wise Remembrance (al-Dhikr
al-ḥakīm) is the Qurʾan, believed by Muslims to contain knowledge of all
things. 2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (ʿIqd, 3:174) ascribes this supplication to
ʿAlī's grandson ʿAlī Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ6:178--187)
explains---with examples, including the famous Eid supplica- tion---that
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn often recited his grandfather's supplications, and some
of them became part of the latter's collection of supplications,
al-Ṣaḥīfah al-Sajjādiyyah. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 768 Text and
Translation 3.270َ ت ءامْهَد ةليل رَ ّبُ غ يف هنم انيسمأ يذلاو ال :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو كشِر عن يوم أغرّ ما كان كذا و كذا. 3.271وقال عليه السلام قليل
تدوم عليه أرجى من كثير مملول منه. إذا أضرّت النوافل بالفرائض فٱرفضوها. من
تذ .ّدعتسٱ رفسلا دعُ ب رّك ليست الرؤية مع الأبصار فقد تكذب العيون أهلها ولا
ي َ غِش ّ العقل من ٱستنصحه. بينكم وبين الموعظة حجاب من الغِرّة. جاهلـكم
مُزدادٌمُسوِّف. ق َ .نيلِ ّلعتملا رذعُ ملعلا َعَط .فيوستلاب لّلعتي ل َ ّجؤُم ّلكو
راظنإلا لأسي لَجاعُم ّلك 3.272وقال عليه السلام: ما قال الناس لشيء طوبى له
إلّا وقد خَبأ له الدهر يوم سَوء. 3.273قال عليه السلام وقد سئل عن القَدَر ِ لَ
ت الف قيمع رحبو هوكـلست الف مِلظُم ٌقيرط جوه وسرّالله فلا تتكلّفوه.
3.274وقال عليه السلام: إذا أرذل الله عبدًا حظر عليه العلم. 3.275رَغِص ينيع
يف همّظعُ ي ناكو هللا يف ٌخأ ىضم اميف يل ناك :مالسلا هيلع لاقو الدنيا في
عينه وكان خارجًا من سلطان بطنه فلا يشتهي ما لا يجد ولا ي ُ كثر إذا وَجد َ
بلاقنإفاً تماصهرهدرثكأناكو َ نونيلئاقلا َ ّذ
قَعغليلالسائلينوكانضعيفًامُستضعَفًا al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 769
3.270 No, I swear by the one in whose protection we spent the black
night, a night that smiled to reveal the brightness of day---that
such-and-such a thing never happened! 3.271 Doing a little often is
better than tiring of a lot.1 If supplemental deeds of worship cause you
to neglect mandatory ones, stop doing them.2 One who ponders the
journey's length will be prepared. True sight is not just seeing with
your eyes. Eyes can lie, but the intellect never deceives those who seek
its counsel. Negligence veils you from counsel. The ignorant among you
do more of this and put off that.3 Knowledge severs excuses.
Thosewhoaresummonedearlyaskformoretime.Thosewhoaregiventime indulge and
procrastinate. 3.272 Never have people exclaimed, "What joy!" without
fate setting up their secret day of doom. 3.273 ʿAlī was asked about
destiny, and he warned: It's a dark road, don't tread it. It's a deep
sea, don't enter it. It's God's mystery, don't torment yourself trying
to understand it. 3.274 When God wants to debase a man, he denies him
knowledge. 3.275 In a time now past, I had a brother whom I loved in
God's name.4 What made him great in my eyes was the smallness of the
world in his. He was not controlled by his stomach---he neither craved
what he could not have, nor indulged in what he had obtained. Mostly, he
was silent. When he spoke, he quietened all who spoke and quenched the
thirst of any who sought. He was frail, and people considered him weak,
but when battle approached, he was a 1 Similar to §3.414. 2 Similar to
§3.34. 3 I.e., they continue to sin and delay repentance. Ḥ19:175; B
998. 4 Lit. "brother in God" (akhun fi-llāh). The reference could be to
the Prophet Muḥammad, or Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī, or Miqdād ibn al-Aswad,
or ʿUthmān ibn Maẓʿūn; or to an ideal, rather
thanreal,brother(Ḥ19:184;B999).ThetexthasalsobeenattributedtoʿAlī'ssonḤasan.(B999
and R 3:385, after Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ; Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 234--235, and
others); it is presented in the edition of Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ's al-Adab
al-kabīr, 314, without attribution, perhaps a copyist error. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 770 Text and
Translation باَ غثيَ لوهفّدِجلاءاجنإف ُ يالٍداو ُ ّلِصو ٍ اًدحأموليالناكواً
يضاقيتأيىّتحةّجحبيلد ناكو هئرُ ب دنع اّلإ اًعَجَو وكشي ال ناكو هراذتعٱ عمسي ىّتح
هلثم يف رذعلا دجي ام ىلع َ لغُ ي مل مالكلا ىلع بلُ غ نإ ناكو لعفي ال ام
لوقي الو لعفي ام لوقي ب على السكوت وكانعلىمايسمع أحرصمنهعلىأنيتكلّموكان
إذاب َ دَههأمراننظر أيّهماأقربإلى الهوى فخالفه. فعليكم بهذه الخلائق
فٱلزموها وتنافسوا فيها فإن لم تستطيعوها فٱعلموا أنّ أخذ القليل خير من ترك
الـكثير. 3.276اً ركش ىصعُ ي ال نأ بجي ناكل ةيصعم ىلع هللا دّعوتَي مل ول
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو لنعمه. 3.277وقال عليه السلام وقد عزّى الأشعث بن قيس عن
ٱبن له نم هللا يفف ربصت نإو مِحَ ّرلا كنم كلذ تّقحتسٱ دقف كنبٱ ىلع نزحت نإ
ثعشأ اي كلّ مصيبة خَل َ ف يا أشعث إن صبرت جرى عليك القَدَر وأنت مأجور وإن
جَزِعت جرى عليك القدر وأنت مأزور. س َ .ةمحرو باوث وهو كنزحو ةنتفو ءالب وهو
ك َ ّر 3.278وقال عليه السلام على قبر رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
ساعةَدُفن إنّ الصبر لجميل إلّا عنك وإنّ الجزع لقبيح إلّا عليك وإنّ الم ُ صاب بك
لجليل وإنّه قبلك َ ـلَ جَل كدعبو ل. 3.279ّ يزُ ي هّنإف قئاملا بحصت ال :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو .هلثم نوكت نأ ّدوَ يو هلعف كل ن al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 771 lionof thethicket,aviperof
theravine.Heneverpresentedanargumentunless it was decisive. He never
censured anyone for what might be excused until he
hadheardthemout.Henevercomplainedof anailmentuntilhehadrecovered. He
preached only what he practiced, and never what he did not. He may have
been overcome in words, but he was never overcome in silence---he was
more eager to listen than to speak. If two options presented themselves
to him, he would look to see which appealed to his passions and do the
opposite.You, too, should emulate these character traits. Stay with
them, race to acquire them. If you cannot do them all, then know that
doing a little is better than renouncing a lot. 3.276 Even if
disobedience were not subject to punishment, you should never disobey
God, in gratitude for his many blessings. 3.277 Offering condolences to
al-Ashʿath ibn Qays on the death of his son, ʿAlī said:1 Ashʿath, it is
fitting that you mourn your son---his relationship to you makes it right
that you should mourn. But if you can bear his loss with fortitude, know
this: you can find consolation for every loss in God. Ashʿath, if you
bear your affliction with fortitude, fate will have assailed you, yes,
but you will be rewarded, whereas if you break down in shock, fate will
have assailed you any- way, and you will be punished.Your son's life
made you happy, but he was a trial for you then and a test.2 His death
has caused you grief, but it is a means for you now to earn God's mercy
and reward. 3.278 ʿAlī spoke these lines at the Messenger of God's
grave, just after burying him:3 Patience is beautiful except in our loss
of you. Shock is loathsome except in our loss of you. The calamity
brought by your death is enormous, while deaths before and after you
mean nothing. 3.279 Don't spend time with a fool. He will lure you to
his ways and try to turn you into him. 1 See also ʿAlī's expressions of
condolence to Ashʿath on the death of his brother in §3.89, and to an
unnamed relative, in §3.385. Abū al-ʿAtāhiyah paraphrased this theme in
a line of con- dolence, "You will no doubt be subject to the flow of
destiny, and either you will be rewarded for your response or a sinner"
(ولا بدّ من جريان القضاء---إمّا مثابًا وإمّا أثيما .)Ḥ19:192; not in the
published Dīwān. 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Taghābun 64:15. 3 In Medina,
11/632. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 772 Text and
Translation 3.280وقال عليه السلام وقد سئل عن مسافة ما بين المشرق والمغرب
مَسيرة يوم للشمس. 3.281وقال عليه السلام: أصدقاؤك ثلاثة وأعداؤك ثلاثة
فأصدقاؤك صديقك وصديق صديقك وعدوّ عدوّك وأعداؤك عدوّك وعدوّ صديقك وصديق عدوّك.
3.282وقال عليه السلام لرجل رآه يسعى على عدوّ له بما فيه إضرار بنفسه إنّما
أنت كالطاعن نفسَه ليقتل رِدْف َ ه. 3.283.رابتعالا ّلقأو رَ بِعلا رثكأ ام
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.284وقال عليه السلام: مَن بال َ غ في الخصومة أَثِم ومن
قصّر فيها ظُلِم ولا يستطيع أن يتّقي الله من خاصم. 3.285ّ لصأ ىّتح هدعب تلِ همُأ
بنذ ينّمهأ ام :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ي ركعتين . 3.286وسئل عليه السلام: كيف
يحاسب الله الخلق على كثرتهم فقال كما يرزقهم على كثرتهم. لاق هنوَرَ ي الو
مهبساحي فيك ليقف كما يرزقهم ولا يرونه. 3.287.كنع قطني ١نم غلبأ كباتكو
كلقع نامُجرَ ت كلوسر :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.288وقال عليه السلام: ما المبتلى
الذي قد ٱشتدّ به البلاء بأحوج إلى الدعاء من المعافى الذي لا يأمن البلاء.
١ي،ھ،ونسخةفيش:كذا.أصلش: ⟩ما⟨.ن:معًا. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 773 3.280 ʿAlī was asked, "What is the distance between East
andWest?" and he answered: The sun's day-long trek. 3.281 You have three
friends and three enemies. Your friends are your friend, the friend of
your friend, and the enemy of your enemy. Your enemies are your enemy,
the enemy of your friend, and the friend of your enemy. 3.282 A man bore
down on an enemy, putting himself in harm's way. Seeing this, ʿAlī said
to him:1 You are like one who pierces himself with a spear to kill the
man riding pillion behind. 3.283 How many lessons and how few heeded!
3.284 To argue too much is to sin, and to argue too little is to lose,
but it is impossible for a man who argues all the time to remain
godfearing. 3.285 As long as I can pray for forgiveness, I don't fear
punishment for past sins. 3.286 ʿAlī was asked, "How will God judge
people when there are so many?" and he replied:2 Just as he feeds them
though there are so many! He was then asked, "How will he judge them
when they cannot see him?" and he replied: Just as he feeds them though
they cannot see him! 3.287 Your envoy is your intellect's interpreter,
your letter your most effective spokesman. 3.288 A man who is afflicted,
whose hardship is severe, is not more in need of prayer than a man who
has been spared but has no guarantee of safety. 1 Ṭabarī (Tārīkh, 4:277)
narrates a version of this line as ʿAlī's words to a group of people in
Med- ina who were criticizing ʿUthmān in the affair of his governor in
Kufa, Walīd ibn ʿUqbah, in 30/651. 2 The man who asked is reported to be
Salmān al-Fārisī, presumably in Medina, before Salmān left for Iraq in
ʿUthmān's caliphate (r. 23--35/644--656). Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 4:288.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 774 Text and
Translation 3.289بح ىلع لجرلا مالُ ي الو ايندلا ءانبأ سانلا :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو ّ أُمّه. 3.290وقال عليه السلام: إنّ المسكين رسول الله فمن منعه فقد منع
الله ومن أعطاه فقد أعطى الله. 3.291وقال عليه السلام: ما زَنى غَيور قط ّ .
3.292وقال عليه السلام: كفى بالأجل حارسًا. 3.293َ رَ حلا ىلع ماني الو لْكُ
ّثلا ىلع لجرلا ماني :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ب . ومعنى ذلك أنّه يصبر على قتل
الأولاد ولا يصبر على سلب الأموال.
3.294وقالعليهالسلام:مودّةالآباءقرابة١الأبناءوالقرابةإلىالمودّةأحوجمنالمودّة
إلى القرابة. 3.295وقال عليه السلام: اتّقوا ظُنون المؤمنين فإنّ الله تعالى
جعل الحقّ على ألسنتهم. 3.296وقال عليه السلام: لا يصدق إيمان عبد حتّى يكون
بما في يد الله سبحانه أوثق منه بما في يده. ١ن،ش:كذا.ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيش:أضيفت
⟩بين⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 775
3.289 People are children of the world, and a man can't be blamed for
loving his mother. 3.290
AbeggarisGod'smessenger,whoeverrefuseshim,refusesGod,whoever gives to
him, gives to God.1 3.291 A man with a jealous sense of honor never
fornicates. 3.292 My allotted lifespan is protection enough!2 3.293 A
man may sleep when bereaved, but he can't find sleep when looted. Raḍī:
This means that a man might endure if his sons are killed, but he cannot
endure when his wealth is plundered. 3.294 Affection among fathers
produces kinship among their sons. Kinship needs affection more than
affection needs kinship. 3.295
Bewarelestyouarousesuspicionsinbelievers'hearts,forGodhasplaced truth on
their tongues! 3.296 A person's faith is not sincere until he trusts
God's gifts more than his own possessions.3 1 Narrated by ʿAlī from the
Prophet in Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim, 1:243. 2 Spoken at Ṣiffīn when ʿAlī's
associates asked him to be wary of Muʿāwiyah's assassins. Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd,
368. 3 Masʿūdī (Murūj, 2:417--418) reports that a suppliant came to
ʿAlī's door, and ʿAlī instructed his son Ḥasan to fetch a dirham from
his mother, Fāṭimah (this would presumably be shortly before Fāṭimah
died, in 11/632, when Ḥasan was a young child). Ḥasan came back with her
caution that they had only six dirhams, which were needed to buy flour.
ʿAlī responded with the line at hand, and told Ḥasan to bring all six
dirhams, which he proceeded to give to the beggar.The next morning, ʿAlī
bought a camel on credit for 140 dirhams, which he then resold for 200,
thus coming home with a profit of 60 dirhams, and he said to Fāṭimah
that this was a fulfilment of God's promise, ﴿منجَاءَبِالْح َ سَن َ ﴾اَ هِ لاَ
ثْمَأُرْشَعُ هَ لَ فِة « :Whoever brings one good deed shall be rewarded with ten
of its kind» (Qurʾan, Anʿām 6:160). A similar line is attributed to the
Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §2.34. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 776 Text and
Translation 3.297وقال عليه السلام لأَن َ ةرصبلا ىلإ اءاج اّ مل ريبزلاو
ةحلط ىلإ هثعب ناك دقو كلام نب س يذ ّ لصهللالوسرنمهعمساً ئيشامهرّك
لاقفهيلإعجرفكلذنعيِوُ لفامهانعميفهلآوهيلعهللاى إن ّ ي أُنسيت ذلك الأمر فقال
عليه السلام .ةمامِعلا اهيراوُ ت ال ةعمال ءاضيب اهب هللا كبرضف اًبذاك تنك نإ
.اًعِقرَ بتُم اّلإ ىري ال ناكو ههجو يف دعب اميف ءادلا اذه اًسنأ باصأف .صَرَ بلا
ينعي 3.298وقال عليه السلام: إنّ للقلوب إقبالًا وإدبارًا فإذا أقبلت فٱحملوها
على النوافل وإذا أدبرت فٱقتصروا بها على الفرائض. 3.299وقال عليه السلام:
في القرآن نبأ ما قبلـكم وخبر ما بعد كم وحكم ما بينكم. 3.300.ّرشلا اّلإ
هعفدي الّرشلا ّنإف ءاج ثيح نم رجحلا َ ّدُر :مالسلا هيلع لاقو al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 777
3.297 When Ṭalḥah and Zubayr marched on Basra, ʿAlī sent Anas ibn Mālik
to remind them of something he, Anas, had heard about the two of them
from God's Messenger. Anas wanted to evade this task, and he came back
to ʿAlī, saying, "I forgot what it was I had heard." ʿAlī exclaimed:1 If
you are lying, may God mar your face with a bright white patch that your
turban cannot conceal! Raḍī: He meant vitiligo (baraṣ). Shortly
thereafter, Anas contracted this disease, and was never seen thereafter
without a veil on his face. 3.298 Hearts are sometimes receptive and
sometimes withdrawn. When they are receptive, urge them to the
supplementary rites of worship. When they are withdrawn, let them stay
with the mandatory rites.2 3.299 The Qurʾan contains reports about what
happened before you, prophe- cies about what will come after you, and
laws about what is present among you.3 3.300 Cast back the stone to
whence it came. Only evil repels evil. 1 Some commentators (R 3:390; B
1000) say that this line, with Raḍī's contextualization, refers to
ʿAlī's sending Anas to Ṭalḥah and Zubayr before the Battle of the Camel
outside Basra in 36/656, to remind them of Muḥammad's prophetic warning,
⟨You will fight ʿAlī in battle, and you will be in the
wrong.⟩Disagreeing with the etymology, Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (19:217--218,
cit- ing Ibn Qutaybah, Maʿārif, chapter on vitiligo, baraṣ) says the
histories do not report that ʿAlī ever sent Anas to speak with Ṭalḥah
and Zubayr. Rather, they report that ʿAlī once called out to people in
the gathering space of Kufa (sometime during his caliphate between
36/656 and 40/661), and said, "Whoever has heard God's Messenger say
about me, while he was returning
fromtheFarewellPilgrimage,⟨ForwhomsoeverIammaster,ʿAlīishismaster;God,lovethose
who love him, and hate those who hate him⟩, I ask him in God's name to
step forward and testify!" Some men stepped forward and testified that
they had been present and heard. ʿAlī said to Anas, "You were there too!
What is the matter with you?" Anas replied, "Commander of the Faithful,
I have grown old, and what I have forgotten is more than what I
remember." It was then that ʿAlī spoke the lines in the text above. 2
Similar to §3.177. 3 Masʿūdī (Murūj, 3:106) reports that Ḥārith
al-Hamdānī complained to ʿAlī that people had forsaken the Qurʾan and
were following specious hadith. ʿAlī replied that the Prophet had
informed him about upcoming seditions and instructed that people should
cleave in such times to the Qurʾan, and the saying at hand is from the
Prophet's words that ʿAlī quoted. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 778 Text and
Translation 3.301وقال عليه السلام لكاتبه عبيد الله بن أبي رافع أَل ِ ق
طِمْرَ قو روطسلا نيب جِّرَ فو كملق ةفْلِج ْلِطَأو كتاوَد ْ ْ بين الحروف فإنّ ذلك
أجدر بصَباحة الخط ّ . 3.302وقال عليه السلام: أنا ي َ عسوب المؤمنين والمال
يعسوب الفجّار. ومعنى ذلك أنّ المؤمنين يتبعونني والفجّار يتبعون المال كما
يتبع النحل يعسوبها وهو رئيسها. 3.303وقال له بعض اليهود ما دفنتم نبيّكم
حتّى ٱختلفتم فقال له آَ نَ ّ ل ْلَعْجٱ﴿ مكّيبنل متلق ىّتح رحبلا نم مكـلجرأ تّفَج
ام مكّنكـلو هيف ال هنع انفلتخٱ امّنإ ُ هَ ل اَ مَك اًهـَ ل ِإ َ هِ لآ ْم َ ق ْمُكَ
ّن ِإ َلاَ قٌة .﴾َنوُ لَهْجَتٌمْو 3.304وقيل له بأي ّ شيء غلبت َ الأقرانَ فقال عليه
السلام تيقَ ل ام ُ رجل ً ا إلّا أعانني على نفسه. يؤمئ بذلك إلى تمكّن هيبته
في القلوب. 3.305وقال عليه السلام لٱبنه محمّد رحمه الله َ نُ ب اي يّ إن ّ ي
أخاف عليك الفقر فٱستعذ بالله منه فإنّ الفقر مَنقَصة للدِّين مَدهَشة للعقل داعية
للم َ قْت. 3.306وقال عليه السلام لسائل سأله عن مُعضِلة هيبش فّسعتملا ملاعلا
ّنإو ملاعلاب هيبش مّلعتملا لهاجلا ّنإف .اً تُ ّنعت لأست الو اًه ُ ّقفت ْلَس
بالجاهل.١ ١ش،ي،ھ:كذا.ن:أضيفت ⟩المتعنّت⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 779 3.301 ʿAlī instructed his scribe, ʿUbaydallāh ibn Abī
Rāfiʿ, as follows: Thicken the ink in your inkpot, lengthen the nib of
your reed-pen, keep spaces between the lines, and bring the letters
close together. Your lettering will then be beautiful. 3.302 I am the
queen bee of the believers.1 Money is the queen bee of the depraved.
Raḍī: This means that while the depraved follow money, believers follow
me, just as honeybees follow the queen. The "queen bee (yaʿsūb)" is the
leader of the honeybees. 3.303 A Jew taunted ʿAlī, "Hardly had you
buried your Prophet, when you fell into dis- agreement!" and ʿAlī
retorted: We disagreed after him, not about him. But your feet had not
dried from the sea when you demanded of your Prophet, «"Make for us a
god like their gods!" whereby he castigated you saying, "you are an
ignorant people!"»2 3.304 ʿAlī was asked, "What force did you use to
overthrow your adversaries?" and he replied: I never met a man who
didn't help me against himself! Raḍī: ʿAlī is alluding to the terror he
would strike deep into their hearts. 3.305 ʿAlī counseled his son
Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah: My dear son, I fear for you if you ever fall
into poverty, so ask God to protect you from it. Poverty harms the
faith, bewilders the mind, and incites to malice. 3.306 ʿAlī replied
thus to a man who asked him about a complicated matter:3 Ask to
understand, not to challenge. An ignorant man who seeks knowledge is
almost like the learned, whereas a learned man who is overly aggressive
is almost an ignoramus. 1 ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr (Usd, 5:287) states
that the Prophet made this statement about ʿAlī. 2 Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:138.
3 In Kufa, to a man named Ibn al-Kawwāʾ,who laterbecame one of the
leaders of the Kharijites. Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 146; Jurjānī, Iʿtibār, 587.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 780 Text and
Translation 3.307وقال عليه السلام لعبد الله بن العبّاس وقد أشار عليه في
شيء لم يوافق رأيه لك أن تشير عليّ وأرى فإن عصيتك فأطعني. 3.308ءاكب عمسف
نيّيمابِّشلاب ّرم نيّفص نم اًمداق ةفوكـلا درو اّ مل مالسلا هيلع هّنأ يوُرو
النساء على قتلى صفّين وخرج إليه حَرْب ٱبن ش ُ رَحْبيل الشباميّ وكان من وجوه
قومه فقال له أيغلبكم نساؤ َ هنَ ت الأ عمسأ ام ىلع مك .نينَ ّرلا اذه نع
ّنهنو وأقبل يمشي معه وهو عليه السلام راكب فقال له ارجع فإنّ مَشْي مثلك مع
مثلي فتنة للوالي ومَذَل ّ ة للمؤمن. 3.309وقال عليه السلام وقد مرّ بقتلى
الخوارج يوم النهر ّرغ نم مكّرض دقل مكـل اًسؤُ ب كم. فقيل له من غرّهم يا أمير
المؤمنين فقال الشيطان الم ُ ضِلّ والأنفس الأمّارة بالسوء غرّتهم بالأمانيّ وف
َ سحت لهم في المعاصي ووعدتهم الإظهار فٱقتحمت بهم النار. 3.310.مكاحلا وه
دهاشلا ّنإف تاوَ لَ خلا يف هللا يصاعم اوقّتا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 781
3.307 ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās offered ʿAlī counsel in a certain matter.
ʿAlī, who had a different opinion, replied:1 You have the right to offer
counsel, and I shall give it thought. But if I decide against it, then
you will need to obey. 3.308 It is related that when ʿAlī arrived in
Kufa from Ṣiffīn, he passed by the lodg- ings of the Shibām clan and
heard women weeping loudly over their fallen warriors. One of their
leaders, Ḥarb ibn Shuraḥbīl al-Shibāmī, came out to greet ʿAlī, who said
to him:2 Do your women rule you? What is this I hear---can't you stop
their wailing? Ḥarb then began to walk alongside ʿAlī, who was on
horseback, and ʿAlī said to him: Go back inside! A man like you, walking
beside a man like me, bodes nothing but sedition for the ruler and shame
for the believer.3 3.309 FollowingtheBattleof
Nahrawān,ʿAlīwalkedoutamongtheKharijites'corpses, and he addressed them
as follows:4 What misfortune you have earned! The one who deceived you
is the one who injured you. Asked, "Who deceived them, Commander of the
Faithful?" he answered: Satan the great deceiver and their own
evil-inciting passions. The two together deceived them with false hopes,
opened their path to sin, promised them con- quest and victory, and then
pitched them into hellfire. 3.310 Beware of disobeying God in private,
for the witness is himself the judge. 1 When the Muslims had pledged
allegiance to ʿAlī in 35/656 in Medina, ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās advised
him to appoint Ṭalḥah as governor of Basra and Zubayr as governor of
Kufa. Ibn al- ʿAbbās also advised ʿAlī to reaffirm Muʿāwiyah as governor
of Damascus, and then, when Muʿāwiyah had pledged allegiance, to affirm
him if he continued to obey, and replace him if he stirred up dissent.
ʿAlī exclaimed, "Great God! Should I corrupt my faith with another's
worldliness!" then spoke the lines in our text. F 452; B 1004; Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh 4:441. 2 In 37/657. Details in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:62; Minqarī,
Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 531 (with this text). 3 I.e., it puffs up the ruler and
humiliates the believer, because his chest and face are close to the
mounted rider's feet. Ḥ19:234. 4 In 38/658. Details and text in Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh, 5:88. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 782 Text and
Translation 3.311ركب يبأ نب دّمحم لتق هغلب اّ مل مالسلا هيلع لاقو إنّ حزننا
عليه على قدر سرورهم به إلّا أنّهم ن ُ قِصوا ب َ غيضًا ون ُ .اً بيبح انصِق
3.312وقال عليه السلام: العمر الذي أعذر الله فيه إلى ٱبن آدم ستّون سنة.
3.313وقال عليه السلام: ما ظَفِر مَن ظفر الإثم ُبه والغالب بالشرّمغلوب.
3.314وقال عليه السلام: إنّ الله سبحانه فرض في أموال الأغنياء أقوات
الفقراء فما جاعَفقير إلّا بما منع غنيّ والله تعالى سائلهم عن ذلك. 3.315وقال
عليه السلام: الاستغناء عن العذر أعزّ من الصدق به. 3.316.هيصاعم ىلع همعنب
اونيعتست ال نأ هلل مكمزلَ ي ام ّلقأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.317وقال عليه
السلام: إنّ الله سبحانه جعل الطاعة غنيمة الأكياس عند تفريط العَجَزة.
3.318وقال عليه السلام: السلطان وَزَعة الله في أرضه. 3.319وقال عليه السلام
في صفة المؤمن المؤمن بِش ْ رُه في وجهه وحزنه في قلبه أوسع شيء صدرًا وأذلّ
شيء نفسًا يكره الرفعة وي َ هتركفب رومغم روبَص روكَش هتقو لوغشم هتمص ريثكهّمه
ديعب هُ ّمغ ٌليوط .ةعم ُ ّسلا أنش ِّ يَ ل ةقيلخلا لهس هتّلُ خب نينَض ن العَريكة
نفسه أصلب من الص ْ ل َ ّ د وهو أذلّ من العبد. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 783 3.311 When the report of Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr's slaying
reached ʿAlī, he ex- claimed:1 Our grief for him equals their joy at his
death! They have dispatched an enemy and we have lost someone we loved!
3.312 Anyone to whom God has granted sixty years of life has no excuse
left.2 3.313 A person who is conquered by sin can never win. A person
who prevails through evil will be crushed. 3.314 God has mandated food
for the poor from the wealth of the rich. When- ever a poor man goes
hungry, it is because a rich man has refused to give, and God will
surely hold him accountable. 3.315 Not needing to give an excuse is even
better than giving a genuine one. 3.316 The least you owe God is not to
use his gifts to sin against him. 3.317 God has made obedience to him a
prize for the wise at a time when the weak are remiss. 3.318 The ruler
is God's custodian on earth.3 3.319 Describing the believer, ʿAlī said:4
A believer shows his joy in his face and hides his sorrow in his heart.
His gen- erosity is vast, his humility is deep. He dislikes fame and
detests praise. His grief is long lasting, his aspirations reach far. He
stays mostly silent and spends his time well. He always gives thanks and
is patient in adversity. He remains immersed in thought and is cautious
when making friends. His temperament is mild and his nature is
easygoing. He is stronger than a rock yet humbler than a slave. 1 In
Kufa, 38/658. Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr, ʿAlī's ward and his governor in
Egypt, was tortured and killed by ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ.Text and details of
the news reaching ʿAlī from Egypt of Muḥam- mad's death and from Syria
of the Syrian's rejoicing, in Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 5:108. 2 Similar saying
attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §2.66. 3 Narrated within
ʿAlī's epistle to commanders, presumably sent from Kufa at the beginning
of his caliphate in 36/656. Minqarī, Waqʿat Ṣiffīn, 125--126. 4 Kulaynī
(Kāfī, 2:226--230) presents this saying as part of the Hammām Oration
(§1.191) in which ʿAlī describes the pious. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 784 Text
and Translation 3.320وقال عليه السلام: لو رأى العبد الأجل ومصيره لأبغض
الأمل وغروره. 3.321وقال عليه السلام: لكلّ ٱمرئ في ماله شريكان الوارث
والحوادث. 3.322.رَ تَو الب يمارلاك لمع الب يعادلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.323وقال عليه السلام: العلم علمان مطبوع ومسموع ولا ينفع المسموع إذا لم
يكن المطبوع. 3.324ُ ي لَو ُ ّدلاب يأرلا باوص :مالسلا هيلع لاقو قبل
بإقبالها وي َ ذهب بذهابها. 3.325وقال عليه السلام: العفاف زينة الفقر
والشكر زينة الغنى. 3.326.مولظملا ىلع روَ جلا موي نم ّدشأ ملاظلا ىلع لدعلا
موي :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.327َ ن ُ ّلُك﴿و ةّولبم رئارسلاو ةظوفحم ليواقألا
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو َ بَسَك اَ مِب ٍسْف ت ْ رَهِين َ
ةٌ﴾والناسمنقوصونمدخولونإلّامنعصماللهسائلهممُتعنّتومجيبهممتكلّف يكاد أفضلهم
رأيًا يردّه عن فضل رأيه الرضى والسخط ويكاد أصلبهم عودًا تَنكأه اللحظة
وتستحيله الكلمة الواحدة. معاشر الناس ٱتّقوا الله فكم من مؤمّل ما لا يبلغه
وبانٍ ما لا يسكنه وجامع ما سوف يتر كه ولعل ّ ه من باطل جمعه ومن حقّ منعه
أصابه حرامًا ِ لَٰذَةَرِخآْلٱَو اَيْن ُ ّدلٱَرِسَخ﴿ دق اًفهال اًفسآ هّبر ىلع مدقو هرزِوب
ءابف اًماثآ هب لمتحٱو كَ .﴾نيِبُ مْلٱ ُناَرْسُ خْلٱَوُه 3.328.يصاعملا ر ُ ّذعت
ةمصعلا نم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 785
3.320 If a man saw his end and his final destination, he would scorn all
desires and their deadly deception. 3.321 Every man's wealth is shared
by two partners: heirs and accidents. 3.322 A person who prays without
deeds is like an archer who shoots with an unstrung bow. 3.323 Knowledge
is of two kinds, innate and acquired---the acquired gives no benefit in
the absence of the innate. 3.324 Good judgment turns on preordained
revolutions of power. It comes when they come, and leaves when they
leave. 3.325 Temperance adorns poverty, gratitude adorns wealth.1 3.326
Justice's day against the oppressor will be harsher than tyranny's day
against the oppressed.2 3.327 Words are remembered, intentions are
tested, and «every soul is mort- gaged to what it has earned.»3 Most
people---except those whom God has protected---are flawed and
weak-minded. The one who asks questions asks only to object, the one who
answers pretends to know the answer. Even the per-
sonwhopossessesjudgmentisindangerof beingsubvertedbydesireorannoy- ance.
Even the person who has inner strength is in danger of being injured by
a look or altered by a word. O people, remain conscious of God! How many
a person hopes for what he will not attain! How many a person builds
what he will not inhabit! How many a person amasses what he will soon
abandon! And perhaps he amassed it from illicit sources or by denying
someone's rights. Per- haps he seized it unlawfully and loaded his back
with a burden of sin. He then returns to the hereafter with his heavy
load and arrives before his Lord filled with guilt and pain, «having
lost this world and the hereafter---that is the most catastrophic
loss!»4 3.328 One way to protect from sinning is to deny access to its
means. 1 From ʿAlī's oration titled Wasīlah (Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 90). The
first half of this saying is similar to §3.60. 2 §3.226 is similar. 3
Qurʾan, Muddaththir 74:38. 4 Qurʾan, Ḥajj 22:11. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 786 Text
and Translation 3.329وقال عليه السلام: ماء وجهك جامد ي ُ قطره السؤال
فٱنظر عند من تقطره. 3.330وقالعليهالسلام:الثناءبأكثرمنالاستحقاقمَل َ
قوالتقصيرعنالاستحقاق ع ِ يّ أو حسد. 3.331وقال عليه السلام: أشدّ الذنوب ما
ٱستهان به صاحبه. 3.332وقال عليه السلام من نظر في عيب نفسه ٱشتغل عن عيب
غيره. ومن رضي برزق الله لم يحزن على ما فاته. .هب لتُ ق يغبلا فيس ّلَس نمو
ومن كاب َ دَالأمور عَطِب. َ ج ُ ّللا محتقٱ نمو ج غَرِق. ِ ه ُ ّتٱ ءو َ ّسلا
لخادَم لخد نمو م. ومنكثركلامهكثرخطاؤهومنكثرخطاؤهقلّ حياؤهومنقلّ حياؤهقلّ
ورعه ومن قلّ ورعه مات قلبه ومن مات قلبه دخل النار. ومن نظر في عيوب الناس
فأنكرها ثمّرضيها لنفسه فذلك الأحمق بعينه. القناعة مال لا ينفد. ومن أكثر
من ذ كر الموت رضي من الدنيا باليسير. ومن علم أنّ كلامه من عمله قلّ كلامه
إلّا فيما ي َ عنيه. 3.333وقال عليه السلام: للظالم من الرجال ثلاث علامات
يظلم من فوقه بالمعصية ُ يو ةبَ لغلاب هنود نمو .ةمَ لظلا موقلا رهاظ
3.334وقال عليه السلام: عند تناهي الشدّة تكون الفُرجة وعند ت َ ضاي ُ ق حَل َ
ق البلاء يكون الرخاء. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 787
3.329 Think of the dignity of your countenance as water frozen in place
until melted away by solicitation---to whom will you offer its droplets?
3.330 Praise beyond a person's worth is flattery. Praise below a
person's worth is impotence or envy. 3.331 The worst sin is one its
perpetrator thinks inconsequential. 3.332 Those who perceive their own
faults are too preoccupied to notice the faults of others. Those who are
happy with the sustenance God has given them are not sad- dened by what
they don't have. Those who draw the sword of treachery are slain by it.
Those who pitch themselves against fate perish. Those who rush blindly
into the deep sea drown. Those who enter places of vice invite
suspicion. When words multiply, errors multiply; when errors multiply,
modesty de- creases; when modesty decreases, restraint decreases; when
restraint decrea- ses, the heart dies---and whoever's heart has died
enters the Fire. If you remark on the faults of others while tolerating
your own, you are the epitome of the fool. Contentment is wealth that
never runs out.1 Contemplate death, and you will want little from this
world. If you realize that words are deeds, you will speak only when it
benefits you. 3.333 An oppressor is identified in three ways: he
oppresses those above him by his disobedience, he oppresses those below
him by his brutality, and he sup- ports the faction of oppressors. 3.334
When suffering becomes intense, deliverance will arrive. When an or-
deal's noose tightens, its grip will slacken. 1 §3.50 is identical.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 788 Text and
Translation 3.335وقال عليه السلام لبعض أصحابه لاتجعلنّ
أكثرشغلكبأهلكوولدكفإنيكنأهلكوولدكأولياءاللهفإنّ اللهلاي ُ ضيّع .هللا
ءادعأب كلغشو كُ ّمه امف هللا ءادعأ اونوكي نإو هءايلوأ 3.336وقال عليه
السلام: أكبر العيب أن ت َ عيب ما فيك مثله. 3.337وهنّأ بحضرته رجل رجل ً
سرافلا َكِنْهَيِ ل⟩ هل لاقف هل دلو مالغب ا ُ ⟨فقال عليه السلام
لاتقلذاكولـكنقلشَكرت َ الواهبوبوركلكفيالموهوبوبلغأشدّهورُزقت .هّرِ ب َ
3.338وبنى رجل من عمّاله بناء فَخ ْ مًا فقال أطلعَت الوَرِق ُ رؤوسها إنّ البناء
ليصف لك الغنى. 3.339لاقفهقزرهيتأيناكنيأنمهيفكرُ توتيببابلجرىلع
ّدُسولمالسلاهيلعهلليقو من حيث يأتيه أجله. 3.340وعزّى عليه السلام قومًا عن
ميّت فقال إنّ هذاالأمرليسبكمبدأولاإليكمٱنتهىوقدكانصاحبكمهذايسافرفعُدّوهفيبعض
أسفاره فإن قدم عليكم وإلّا قدمتم عليه. 3.341ةمقنلا نم مكاري امك نيلِجَو
ةمعنلا نمُ هللا مكَرَ يِ ل سانلا اهّيأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو ف َ قّيُض نمو اً فوخم
نمأ دقف اًجاردتسٱ كلذ ري ملف هدي تاذ يف هيلع عّسُو نم هّنإ نيقِر عليه في ذات
يده فلم ير ذلك ٱختبارًا فقد ضيّع مأمولًا. 3.342اهنم هعوري ال ايندلا ىلع جِّرعُ
ملا ّنإف اورِصقأ ةبغرلا ىرسأ اي :مالسلا هيلع لاقو إلّا صريف أنياب الحِدثان.
أيّها الناس تول ّ وا من أنفسكم تأديبها وٱعدلوا بها عن ضَراية١ عاداتها.
١ش،ن،ي،ونسخةفيھ:كذا.أصلھ،ومصحّحةفيش،ونسخةفين،ي: ⟩ضَراوة⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 789
3.335 ʿAlī said to one of his associates: Don't devote the major part of
your life to your spouses and children. If they are God's devotees, God
will take care of them. And if they are God's enemies, well then, why
should you occupy yourself with caring for God's enemies? 3.336 Your
biggest fault is faulting others for a fault you too possess. 3.337 A
man congratulated another on the birth of a son in ʿAlī's presence,
saying, ⟨May the warrior bring you joy!⟩1 ʿAlī rebuked him:2 Don't say
that! Say instead: May you thank your divine benefactor, may his
heavenly grace encompass this child who is his gift, may the child grow
to full strength, and may you be blessed with his devotion! 3.338 One of
ʿAlī governors built a grand mansion, and ʿAlī said to him in rebuke:
Here are silver dirhams displaying their faces! The mansion speaks
loudly of your wealth. 3.339 Asked, "If a man's door is locked with him
inside, from where does his suste- nance enter?" ʿAlī replied: The same
place from where his death will enter. 3.340 Offering condolences to
some persons upon the death of a loved one, ʿAlī said: This matter has
not begun with you and will not end with you.Your friend used to travel,
so think of him as being away on one of his journeys. If he does not
come back to you, you will go forward to meet him. 3.341 People! Let God
see you vigilant in times of ease, just as he sees you wary intimesof
hardship.Whoeverfailstoseethetestwhenhishandsfillwithbless- ings is
complacent about the impending terror. Whoever fails to see the trial
when his hands straiten, squanders the reward he could have received.
3.342 Prisoners of craving, desist! Anyone who fixes his hopes on the
world fails to take warning until calamity, gnashing her teeth,
approaches. People, restrain yourselves, turn away from your rapacious
ways! 1 Preferred felicitation used in the pre-Islamic period at the
birth of a son. Ḥ19:270; R 3:403. 2 Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 394) records
ʿAlī's line (without the rebuke) as having been addressed to ʿAbdallāh
ibn al-ʿAbbās, congratulating him on the birth of a son, upon whom ʿAlī
then pro- ceeded to bestow, at ʿAbdallāh's request for a name, the name
ʿAlī and the patronymic Abū al-Ḥasan, after his own. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 790 Text
and Translation 3.343وقال عليه السلام: لا تظن ّ نّ بكلمة خرجت من أحد سُوءًا
وأنت تجد لها في الخـير محتمَل ً ا.
3.344وقالعليهالسلامإذاكانتلكإلىاللهسبحانهحاجةفٱبدأبمسألةالصلاةعلى النبيّ
صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله ثم سَل حاجتك فإنّ الله أكرم من أن يسأل حاجتين فيقضي
إحداهما ويمنع الأخرى. 3.345.ءارِ ملا عديلف هضرِعب ّنَض نم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.346.ةصرفلا دعب ةانألاو ناكمإلا لبق ةلجاعملا قْرُ خلا نم :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو 3.347وقال عليه السلام: لا ت َ سَل عمّا لا يكون ففي الذي قد كان لك
شغل. 3.348وقال عليه السلام الفكر مِرآة صافية. والاعتبار منذر ناصح. .كريغل
هتهرك ام كبُ ّنجت كسفنل اًبدأ ىفكو 3.349وقال عليه السلام: العلم مقرون
بالعمل فم َ نإف لمعلاب فِتْهَي ملعلاو لِمَع مِلَ ع ن أجابه وإلّا ٱرتحل.
3.350اهتعلُ ق هاعرَم اوبّنجتف ئبوم ماطُح ايندلا عاتَم سانلا اهّيأ اي :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو ينَغ نَم نيعُأو ةقافلاب اهيرِثكُم ىلع مِكُح اهتورث نم ىكزأ اهتغلُ بو
اهتنينأمط نم ىظحأ عنها بالراحة ومَن رَاقه زِبرِجُها أَعقبت ناظِر َيهكَم َ هًا ومن
ٱستشعر الشغَف بها ملأت ضميره أشجانًا لهنّ رَقْص ٌ على سُوَيداء قلبه همٌّ يشغله
وهمّ يحزنه. كذلك حتّى يؤخذ َ هْبَأاًعطقنمءاضفلابىقلُ يفهمْظَكب
رظنيامّنإو.هؤاقلإناوخإلاىلعوهؤانفهللاىلعاً نِّيَههار المؤمن إلى الدنيا بعين
الاعتبار وي َ قتات منها ببطن الاضطرار ويسمع فيها بأذن المقت مهتأي ملو
اذه .ءانفلاب هل نِزُح ءاقبلاب هل حِرُ ف نإو ىدكأ ليق ىرثأ ليق نإ ضاغبإلاو
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 791
3.343 Don't regard a statement as spiteful if you can find a way to
interpret it as good. 3.344 If you wish to ask God for something, begin
by asking him to bless the Prophet, then put forward your petition. When
God is asked for two things, he is too generous to grant the one and
deny the other. 3.345 Anyone who wishes to preserve his dignity should
not quarrel. 3.346
Theonewhorushesinbeforethetimeisrightandtheonewhohesitates when the
opportunity arrives are both fools. 3.347 Don't ask about what is not
going to happen. You have enough to preoc- cupy you in dealing with what
has happened.1 3.348 Thought is a polished mirror. A lesson learned
counsels best. To shun doing what you dislike in others is discipline
enough!2 3.349 Knowledge is linked with action---whoever knows should
act. In fact, knowledgecallsouttoaction---if
actionstepsforward,good,otherwise,knowl- edge will depart. 3.350 People!
The stuff of this world is like rotten grass, so stay away from its
pastures! Leaving it is better than residing in it, obtaining basic
rations here is
morewholesomethanfindinggreatwealth.Hewhocovetsitsrichesisdestined for
poverty, while he who is content is at peace, and he who is drawn to its
glit- ter finds both his eyes blinded. In fact, he who is enamored of it
finds his heart crowded with sorrows that dance inside its dusky core,
one sorrow giving him worry, another causing him pain, continuing in
this manner until his breathing stops, his arteries puncture, and he is
thrown into an empty strip of earth. God feels no compunction in taking
his life, and his brothers feel no guilt in tossing him into the grave.
Beware! A true believer looks at the world with eyes that reflect on it,
swallows a bit of its food into a belly compelled to consume it, and
hears its sounds with ears that hate and abhor their frivolity. A man
may get 1 Or, "Don't yearn for forbidden things, for what you have is
enough to stop you from with- holding acts of obedience to God" (R
3:408). Or, "Don't yearn for more and more worldly things---what you
have should be enough to satisfy you" (B 1011). 2 §3.385 is similar.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 792 Text and
Translation ِ لبُ ي هيف موي سون إنّ الله سبحانه وضع الثواب على طاعته
والعقاب على معصيته ذِيادة لعباده عن نقمته وحِياشة لهم إلى جنّته.١
3.351هتبطخ مامأ لاق اّلإ ربنملا هب لدتعٱ امّ لق مالسلا هيلع هّنأ يوُرو
تنّسحتيتّ لاهايندامووغلَ يفىًدسكرُ تالووهلَ يفاً
ثبعؤرمٱقلُخامفهللااوقّتٱسانلااهّيأ َ لَ خب هل ىلعأب ايندلا نمرفظ يذلا
رورغملا امو هدنع رظنلا ءوس اهحّبق يتّ لا ةرخآلا نم ف همّتهكالآخر الذي ظفر
من الآخرة بأدنى س ُ همته. 3.352وقال عليه السلام لا شرف أعلى من الإسلام.
ولا عزّ أعزّ من التقوى. ولا مَعْقِل أحصن من الورع. ولا شفيع أنجح من التوبة.
ولا كنز أغنى من القناعة. ولا مال أذهب للفاقة من الرضى بالقوت. .ةعدلا ضفخ
أّوبتو ةحارلا مظتنٱ دقف فافكـلا ةغْلُ ب ىلع رصتقٱ نمو والرغبة مفتاح النصب
ومطيّة التعب. .بونذلا يف م ُ ّحقتلا ىلإ ٍعاود دسحلاو ربكـلاو صرحلاو
.بويعلا ئواسم ٌعماج ٢هَرَ ّشلاو ١ش، ن، ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا. ي، وأصل ھ: أضيفت
كلمة ⟩وقال يأتي على الناس زمان لا بارخىنُ
بلانمةرماعذئمويمهدجاسمهمسٱاّلإمالسإلانموهمسراّلإنآرقلانممهيفىقبي من الهدى
سكّانها وعمّارها شرّ أهل الأرض منهم تخرج الفتنة وإليهم تأوي الخطيئة يردّون
من شذّ عنها فيها ويسوقون من تأخّر عنها إليها يقول الله فبي حَلفت ُ لأبعثنّ
إلى اولئك فتنة أترك الحليم فيها حيران وقد فعل ونحن نستقيل الله عثرة
الغفلة⟨. ٢الحرّاني في تحف العقول: كذا. مخطوطات النهج الرئسيّة )ما عدا م،
حيث هذه الحكمة ساقطة عنها( وأكثر الشروح: ⟩الشرّ⟨. ونسخةفيهامشھ: ⟩البخل⟨.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 793
rich in this world, but then he is reduced to penury; people may rejoice
at his living, but soon they must grieve at his death; and this is but
little, for the day of despair is yet to come!1 God has promised reward
for those who obey him and punishment for those who disobey him, in
order to caution them against his Fire and tempt them toward his Garden.
3.351 It is said that ʿAlī rarely ascended the pulpit to deliver an
oration without open- ing with these lines:2 People, be conscious of God
at all times! Humans are not created in vain3--- don't waste your lives
in the pursuit of pleasure! You are not given an indefinite
reprieve4---don't squander your time in idle chatter! This world that
you find so pleasing is no substitute for the hereafter that you find so
distasteful. Indeed, the fool who wins the largest share of this world
falls far short of the man who wins the smallest part of the hereafter.
3.352 There is no honor more exalted than Islam.5 There is no might more
powerful than piety. There is no refuge more shielding than restraint.
There is no intercessor more effective than repentance. There is no
treasure more precious than contentment. No wealth alleviates poverty
faster than satisfaction with one's basic rations. If you content
yourself with basic rations, you will attain tranquility and peace of
mind. Desire is the key to fatigue and the steed of exhaustion. Greed,
pride, and envy invite you to rush blindly into sin. Gluttony combines
all the worst faults.6 1 Reference to Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:77, Rūm 30:12.
2 Presumably in Medina and Kufa throughout his caliphate,
35--40/656--661. 3 Reference to Qurʾan, Muʾminūn 23:115. 4 Reference to
Qurʾan, Qiyāmah 75:36. 5 These sayings are from ʿAlī's oration titled
Wasīlah. Ḥarrānī, Tuḥaf, 93. 6
Ar.sharah,afterḤarrānī,Tuḥaf,93,thussimilarto§3.357:"Stinginess(bukhl)combinesallthe
worst faults." My Nahj al-Balāghah primary manuscripts all have "sharr,"
lit. "evil," thus, "Evil combines all the worst faults," which appears
to be a tautology, and thus a mistranscription from sharah. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 794 Text and
Translation 3.353وقال عليه السلام١ قِوام الدنيا بأربعة عالم مُستعمِل علمه
وجاهل لا ي َ ستنكف أن يتعلّم وجَواد لا يبخل
اذإومّلعتينألهاجلافكنتسٱهملعملاعلاعّيضاذإف.هايندبهترخآعيبَ يالريقفوهفورعمب
بخلالغنيّبمعروفهباعَالفقيرآخرتهبدنياه.منكثرتنعماللهعليهكثرتحوائجالناس إليه
فمن قام لله فيها بما يجب عرّضها للدوام والبقاء ومن لم يقم لله فيها بما
يجب عرّضها للزوال والفناء. 3.354 3.354.1أيّها المؤمنون٢ إنّه من رأى ع ُ ُ ي
اً رَكنُمو هب لَمعُ ي اًناود دعى إليه فأنكره بقلبه فقد
نوكتلفيسلابهركنأنموهبحاصنملضفأوهورجُأدقفهناسلبهركنأنموئرَ بوملَس ﴿كَلِم َ َ
مِلَك﴿و﴾اَ يْلُعْلاَيِهِهّٰللٱُة َ لْف ُ ّسلا﴿ نيملاظلا﴾ة ى ٰ ﴾فذلكالذيأصابسبيلالهدى
وقام على الطريق ونوّر في قلبه اليقين. 3.354.2وقد قال عليه السلام في كلام
آخر غير هذا يجري هذا المجرى فمنهم المنكِر للمنكَر بيده ولسانه وقلبه فذلك
المستكمل لخصال الخـير ومنهم المنكر بلسانه وقلبه والتارك بيده فذلك متمسّك
بخصلتين من خصال الخـير ومضيّع خصلة ومنهم
المنكربقلبهوالتاركبيدهولسانهفذلكالذيضيّعأشرفالخصلتينمنالثلاثوتمسّك
بواحدةومنهمتاركلإنكارالمنكربلسانهوقلبهويدهفذلكميّتالأحياء.وماأعمالالبرّ
١ش، ن: كذا. ي، ھ: ⟩وقال لجابر بن عبد الله الأنصاري ّ يا جابر⟨. ٢ش، ن:
كذا. ي، ھ )وفيهامشھ: ⟩وفينسخةالرضيّ ...⟨(:أضيفتقبلها ⟩وروىٱبنجريرالطبري ّ
فيتاريخهعن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى الفقيه وكان ممّن خرج لقتال الحَجّاج مع
ٱبن الأشعث أنّه قال فيما كان ءادهشلاباوثهباثأونيـحلاصلايفهتجردهللاعفراً
ّيلعتعمسينإداهجلاىلعسانلاهبضّضحُي
والصدّيقينيقوليوملقيناأهلالشام⟨.تاريخالطبري ّ ٦: ٧٥٣ . al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 795
3.353 The world is sustained by four types of people: the learned who
act according to their knowledge, the ignorant who are not reluctant to
learn, the generous who are not stingy with acts of charity, and the
poor who don't trade in their share of the hereafter for worldly
chattels. But if the learned squander their knowledge, the ignorant will
be reluctant to learn, and if the wealthy are stingy with their charity,
the poor will trade in their share of the hereafter for
worldlychattels.KnowthatwhenGod'sblessingsincreaseforaperson,people's
petitions to him also increase. The one who shares his blessings as he
ought to do for the sake of God earns their continuance and perpetuity.
The one who does not share them as he ought to do for the sake of God
exposes them to cessation and termination.1 3.354 3.354.1 Believers,
whoever sees wrong enacted and evil propagated and con- demns them with
his heart is cleared and absolved. Whoever also condemns them with his
tongue earns greater reward.Whoever also condemns them with his sword in
order that «God's word may be the most lofty» and the oppressors'
«wordthemostlowly»2haswalkedthewayof guidance,stayedtruetothepath, and
illuminated his heart with certainty.3 3.354.2 ʿAlī spoke similar words
in another address:4 One of them condemns evil with his hand, his
tongue, and his heart---this man hasperfectedallthetraitsof
virtue.Anothercondemnsevilwithhistongueand his heart, but not with his
hand---this man has grasped two aspects of virtue but has squandered the
third. A third condemns evil with his heart, but not with his hand or
his tongue---this man has squandered the two noblest aspects while still
holding on to one. Finally, there is the man who fails to condemn evil
at all, be it with tongue, heart, or hand---that man is the living dead.
Know this: 1 Reportedly addressed to (1) Jābir ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Anṣārī,
when he went to visit ʿAlī during an illness (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 173;
Khwārazmī, Manāqib, 368; mss Y and H); and/or (2) Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh
al-Bajalī (Sibṭ, Tadhkirah, 168). 2 Reference to Qurʾan, Tawbah 9:40. 3
§3.354.1 is said to be part of an oration by ʿAlī at Ṣiffīn in 37/657,
cited by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Laylā to rouse the Qurʾan reciters in
his army in the fight against Ḥajjāj and the Umayyads at Dayr
al-Jamājim, in central Iraq in 83/702. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 6:357. 4 §3.354.2
is cited as an answer given during an oration in the mosque in Basra, a
few days after the Battle of the Camel (Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 228). Other
parts of the same oration as cited in ibid., 221--233 are listed in note
to §1.23. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 796 Text and
Translation كلّها والجهاد في سبيل الله عند الأمر بالمعروف والنهي عن
المنكر إلّا كن َ فْث َ ة ﴿فِيْ بَحْرٍ لُج ِّيٍّ ﴾وإنّ
الأمربالمعروفوالنهيعنالمنكرلايقرّبانمنأجلولايَنقُصانمنرزق وأفضل ذلك كلمة
عدل عند إمام جائر. 3.354.3وعن أبي جُحَيفة قال سمعت أمير المؤمنين عليه
السلام يقول
هبلقبفرعيملنمفمكبولقبّمثمكتنسلأبّمثمكيديأبداهجلاداهجلانمهيلعنوبلغُ تاملّوأ
ّنإ ِ لُ ق اً رَكنم ركني ملو اً فورعم .هلفسأ هالعأ لعُ جف ب 3.355وقال عليه
السلام: إنّ الحقّ ثقيل مَري ّ وإنّ الباطل خفيف وبيّ. 3.356وقال عليه السلام:
لا تأمننّ على خير هذه الأمّة عذاب الله لقول الله سبحانه َ لَ ف﴿
هلوقلهللاحوَرنمةّمألاهذهّرشل ّنَسأيَتالو﴾نوُرِسَٰ خْلٱُمْوَقْلٱا َ ّل ِإِهّٰللٱَ رْكَم ُنَم
ْأَيا ـْياَي اَلُهَ ّن ِإ﴿ هناحبس ٔ ـ َ س ُ رِفَٰكْـلٱُمْوَقْلٱ ا َ ّل ِإِهّٰللٱ ِحْو َ ّر
نِم ُ ونَ﴾. 3.357وقالعليهالسلام:البخلجامعلمساوئالعيوبوهوزِمامي ُ قادبهإلىكلّ
سوء. 3.358وقال عليه السلام: الرزق رزقان رزق تطلبه ورزق يطلبك فإن لم تأت
ِ ه أتاك فلا تحمل همّ سنتك على همّ يومك كفاك كلّ يوم ما فيه فإن تكن السنة
من عمرك فإنّ الله تعالى سيؤتيك في كلّ غد جديد ما ق َ س َ م لك وإن لم تكن
السنة من عمرك فما تصنع بالهمّ
لماليسلكولنيسبقكإلىرزقكطالبولنيغلبكعليهغالبولنيبطئعنكماقد ق ُ دّر لك.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 797
Compared to fighting in the path of God, compared to commanding good and
forbidding evil, all other deeds together are like ephemeral foam «upon
the deep ocean».1 Commanding good and forbidding evil never bring your
death closer, nor do they cause your sustenance to lessen. Best of all
is a just word spoken in the face of a tyrannical ruler. 3.354.3 Abū
Juḥayfah related: I heard the Commander of the Faithful say: In the
fight against evil, the first thing to be overcome is the hand, then the
tongue, then the heart. Once the heart stops recognizing good or
condemning evil, it is upended and turned topsy-turvy. 3.355 Right is
heavy but wholesome. Wrong is light but pestilent.2 3.356 Don't suppose
even the best of this community secure against God's punishment, for the
Almighty says, «Only losers feel secure against God's reck- oning».3
Don't suppose that even the worst of this community is without hope of
receiving God's grace, for the Almighty says, «Only unbelievers despair
of God's grace».4 3.357 Stinginess combines all the worst faults---its
halter is used to lead peo- ple to evil acts. 3.358 Sustenance is of two
types: one that seeks and one that is sought.5 If you don'tfind it, it
willfindyou.Don'taddtheworriesof thecomingyeartothebur- dens of the
present day---the present day has worries enough of its own. If your
life extends to the rest of the year, God will provide you with his
ordained sus- tenance in each new day, but your life may not extend to
the rest of the year, in which case, why worry about a time when you may
not be alive? Know this: No seeker can outrace you to your sustenance,
no oppressor can seize your share, and nothing ordained for you will be
slow in coming. 1 Qurʾan, Nūr 24:40. Note that "fighting in God's path (
jihād)" is equated with "commanding good and forbidding evil" twice in
the subsequent lines. 2 To ʿUthmān, who had lost control of the populace
and summoned his governors to strategize. Balādhurī, Ansāb, 5:533; Ibn
Aʿtham, Futūḥ, 2:395. 3 Qurʾan, Aʿrāf 7:99. 4 Qurʾan, Yūsuf 12:87. 5
This first line identical to §3.402. The next few lines are similar to
§3.260. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 798 Text and
Translation وقد مضى هذا الكلام فيما تقدّم من هذا الباب إلّا أنّه هاهنا أوضح
وأشرح فلذلك كرّرناه على القاعدة المقرّرة في أوّل هذا الكتاب.
3.359وقالعليهالسلام:رُب ُ مبسيلاًمويلِبقتسُم َ ّ تماقةليللّوأيفطوبغَموهرِ بدتس
.هرخآ يف هيكاوَ ب
3.360وقالعليهالسلام:الكلامفيوَثاقكمالمتتكلّمبهفإذاتكلّمتبهصرتفيوثاقه فٱخزُن
لسانك كما تخزن ذهبك ووَرِق َ ك فر ُ ب .ةمعن تبلس ةملك َ ّ 3.361وقال عليه
السلام: لا تقل ما لا تعلم فإنّ الله سبحانه قد فرض على جوارحك كلّها فرائض
يَحتجّ بها عليك يوم القيامة. 3.362وقالعليه السلام:احذرأنيراك الله
عندمعصيته وي َ فقِدك عند طاعتهفتكون من الخاسرين وإذا ق َ ويت فٱقوَعلى طاعة
الله وإذا ضعفت فٱضعف عن معصية الله. 3.363ِ ياعُ ت ام عم ايندلا ىلإ نوكرلا
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو ن منها جهل والتقصير في حسن العمل إذا وَث ِ قت ْ بَ غ
هيلع باوثلاب َ ن والطمأنينة إلى كلّ أحد قبل الاختبار عجز. 3.364هدنعاملانُ
يالواهيفاّلإىصعيالهّنأهللاىلعايندلاناوهنم:مالسلاهيلعلاقو إلّا بتركها.
3.365.هضعب وأ هَ لان اً ئيش بلط نم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 799 Raḍī: This text was recorded above, but this version is
clearer and more detailed. That is why I have replicated it here,
following the method I outlined in the book's Introduc- tion.1 3.359
Many begin a day they will not survive. Many enter a night joyful and
end it dead and mourned.2 3.360 Words are in your control until you let
them go. Once you let them go, you are bound by their tether. Guard your
tongue as you guard your gold and silver, for many a careless word has
caused the loss of a great blessing! 3.361 Don't say things that you
don't know to be true. God has assigned duties to each of your limbs,
and he will hold you accountable on the day of resurrec- tion.3 3.362
Beware lest God see you where he is disobeyed and not find you where he
is obeyed, else you will be one of the losers. Be strong in your
obedience to God. Be weak in your transgression of his prohibitions.
3.363 To depend on this world despite everything you see of her is
reckless. To fall short in doing good when you are certain of God's
reward is stupid. To trust everyone before putting them to the test is
naive. 3.364 The world's low worth in God's eyes is clear from the fact
that it is only in her that he is disobeyed, and only by forsaking her
that his are blessings obtained. 3.365 Whoever seeks something obtains
it or at least a part of it. 1 §3.358 was transcribed in a variant
version earlier in §3.260. Raḍī explained in his Introduc- tion §0.7
that he would record variant renderings of text if their language or
content adds something new or noteworthy. 2 From ʿAlī's testament of
counsel to his son Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah (Ṣadūq, Man lā yaḥḍuruhu,
4:386). A similar line is attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb,
§3.18. 3 From ʿAlī's testament of counsel to his son Muḥammad ibn
al-Ḥanafiyyah. Ṣadūq, Man lā yaḥḍuruhu, 2:626. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 800 Text
and Translation 3.366وقالعليه السلام: ما خير بخـير بعده النار وما
شرّبشرّبعده الجنّة وكلّ نعيم دون الجنّةمَحقوروكلّ بلاءدونالنارعافية.ألاوإنّ
منالبلاءالفاقةوأشدّ منالفاقةمرض البدن وأشدّ من مرض البدن مرض القلب. ألا
وإنّ من النعم سعة المال وأفضل من سعة المال صحّة البدن وأفضل من صحّة البدن
تقوى القلب. 3.367ّمُرَ ي ةعاسو هّبر اهيف يجاني ةعاسف تاعاس ثالث نمؤملل
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو معاشه وساعة يخل ّ ي بين نفسه وبين لذّتها فيما يحلّ ويجم
ُ ل. وليس للعاقل أن يكون شاخصًا إلّا في ثلاث ٍ مَرَمّةًلمعاش أو خُطوةًفي معاد أو
لذّةًفي غير مَحر َ م. 3.368لوفغمب تسلف لفغت الو اهتاروع هللا كرِصبُ ي ايندلا
يف دَهزِا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو عنك. 3.369وقال عليه السلام: ت َ .هناسل تحتّوبخَم
ءرملا ّنإف اوفَ رعُ ت اومَ ّلك 3.370ّ لوت اّمع ّلَوَ تو كاتأ ام ايندلا نم ذخ
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو ى عنك فإن أنت لم تفعل فأجمِل في الطلب. 3.371وقال عليه
السلام: رُب .لوَص نم ذفنأ لوق َ ّ 3.372وقال عليه السلام: كلّ مُقتصَرٍ عليهكاف
ٍ . 3.373طعُ يملنمول ُ ّسوتلاالولُ ّلقتلاوةّيندلاالوةّينملا:مالسلاهيلعلاقو َ
قاعدًالميعط .ربصٱف كيلع ناك اذإو رَطبَت الف كل ناك اذإف كيلع مويو كل موي
ناموي رهدلاو اً مئاق al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 801
3.366 How can a thing be good if it leads you into the Fire? How can a
thing be bad if it leads you into the Garden? Compared to the Garden,
every blessing is contemptible. Compared to the Fire, every trial is a
comfort. Hark! A trial may come in the form of poverty---but worse than
poverty is disease of the body, and worse than disease of the body is
disease of the heart. Hark! A blessing may come in the form of abundant
wealth---but better than abundant wealth is soundness of the body, and
better than soundness of the body is piety of the heart. 3.367 The
believer divides his time into three parts: in one part, he communes
with his Lord, in another, he seeks his livelihood, and in the third, he
allows himself to enjoy pleasures that are licit and good. The man of
reason sets out for no purpose other than these three: to seek his
livelihood, to take a step for- ward on the path of return to God, or to
enjoy pleasures that are not forbidden.1 3.368 Renounce the world and
God will show you her flaws. Don't remain heedless for you go not
unheeded. 3.369 Speak and you will be known---a man is concealed behind
his tongue. 3.370 Take what comes to you of this world and turn away
from what turns away. If you can't bring yourself to do so, be moderate
in your ventures. 3.371 Many a word pierces deeper than a sword. 3.372
What you are content with is enough. 3.373 Death, not shame! Poverty,
not begging! Someone who doesn't receive while sitting will not receive
when standing. Life consists of two days: one day is for you, another
day is against you. When things are working in your favor, don't
swagger. When things are going against you, be patient. 1 From ʿAlī's
testament of counsel to his son Ḥasan. Barqī, Maḥāsin, 2:345. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 802 Text and
Translation 3.374وقال عليه السلام: مُقارَبة الناس في أخلاقهم أمنٌ من
غَوائلهم.١ 3.375وقال عليه السلام: من أَومأ إلى مُتفاوِت ٍ خذلته الحيل.
3.376وقال عليه السلام وقد سُئل عن معنى قولهم ⟩لا حول ولا قوّة إلّا بالله⟨
ىتمو انفّلَك اّنم هب كلمأ وه ام انكّلم ىتمف انَكَ ّلَم ام اّلإ كلمن الو اً ئيش
هللا عم كلمن ال انّإ أخذه منّا وضع تكليفه عنّا. 3.377وقال عليه السلام لعَمّار
بن ياس ِ اًمالكةبْعُش نب ةريغُ ملا عجاري هعمس دقو هللا همحر ر لعجيل هسفن ىلع
سّبـَ ل ٍدمَع ىلعو ايندلا هتبراق ام اّلإ نيدلا نم ذخأي مل هّنإف راّمع ايُهْعَد
الشبهات عاذرًا لسقطاته. 3.378نسحأو هللا دنع امل اً بلط ءارقفلل ءاينغألا
عضاوت نسحأ ام :مالسلا هيلع لاقو .هللا ىلع اًلاكّتٱ ءاينغألا ىلع ءارقفلاُهيِ
ت هنم 3.379وقال عليه السلام: ما ٱستودع الله ٱمرأ ًعقل ً ا إلّا ٱستنقذه به
يومًا ما. 3.380.هعرَص َ ّقحلاَعراص نم :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.381وقال عليه
السلام: القلب مُصحَف البصر. 3.382وقال عليه السلام: التقى رئيس الأخلاق. ١ن،
ش، م: كذا. ي، ھ، وزيادة في هامش م: أضيفت كلمة ⟩وقال عليه السلام لبعض و
.⟨اً بْقَس تردهو اًريكَش ترط دقل اهلثم لوق نع هلثم رغصتسي ةملكب مّلكت دقو
هيبطاخم ⟩الشكير⟨هٰهنا أوّل ما ينبت من ريش الطائر قبل أن يقوى ويستحصف.
و⟩السقب⟨الصغير منالإبلولايهدرإلّابعدأنيستفحل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 803 3.374 Coming closer to people's ways protects you from
their malice.1 3.375 One who seeks contradictory goals will not find a
way to achieve them. 3.376 ʿAlī was asked about the meaning of the
creed, ⟨There is no power or strength save from God⟩, and he replied: We
are not masters of anything in partnership with God, nor are we masters
of anything without him having made us its master. When he makes us
master over his possessions, he gives us a burden to carry, and when he
takes it from us, he relieves us of the burden. 3.377 Hearing ʿAmmār ibn
Yāsir arguing with al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah, ʿAlī said:2 Leave him,
ʿAmmār! Mughīrah has never accepted any aspect of religion that didn't
bring him worldly benefit. He deliberately creates doubts for himself so
he can use them to excuse his blunders. 3.378 How wonderful when the
rich, seeking God's reward, are humble before the poor! How even more
wonderful when the poor, placing their trust in God, are dignified
before the rich! 3.379 If God has bestowed a man with reason, he will
use it to save him some- day. 3.380 If you wrestle with truth, you will
be felled by it. 3.381 The heart is the register of the eye. 3.382
Consciousness of God is the chief of all virtues. 1 mss Y, H, and M (in
margin) add another saying here, with accompanying commentary, thus:
Rebuking a person who said something that was not his place to say, ʿAlī
exclaimed: "You fly when youstill havea fledgling'sdown,andbellowwhenyou
are but a calf!" Raḍī: "Afledgling's down (shakīr)" are the first
feathers just appearing on a bird before they have strengthened and
toughened. A "calf (saqb)" is the young of a camel, and it does not
bellow until it has become a stallion. 2 In Medina, soon after ʿAlī
became caliph in 35/656, when ʿAmmār urged Mughīrah to pledge allegiance
to ʿAlī and Mughīrah refused, saying he would wait until the confusion
about ʿUth- mān's death cleared. Ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh, 60:44; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah, 1:69. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 804 Text and
Translation 3.383وقال عليه السلام: لا تجعلنّ ذَرَب لسانك على من أنطقك
وبلاغة قولك على من سدّدك. 3.384وقال عليه السلام: كفاك أدبًا لنفسك ٱجتناب
ما تكرهه من غيرك. 3.385.رامغألاّولُس الَس اّلإو رارحألاَرْبَصَرَ بَص نم :مالسلا
هيلع لاقو اًيّزعُم سيَ ق نب ثعشألل لاقو إن صبرت صبر الأكارم وإلّا سلوت
سلوّالبهائم. 3.386وقال عليه السلام في صفة الدنيا لهأ ّنإو هئادعأل اًباقع
الو هئايلوأل اًباوث اهَضرَ ي مل ىلاعت هللا ّنإّرُ متو ّرُضتوّرُغت ايندلا الدنيا
كر َ كب .اولحترٱف مهقئاس مهب َحاص ذإ اوُ ّلَح مهانيَ ب ٍ 3.387وقال لٱبنه
الحسن عليهما السلام َ نُ باي يّلاتُخلِّ
ةعاطبهيفلمعلجراّمإنيلجردحألهفّلخُتكّنإفايندلانماً ئيشكءارو ّنَف الله فسعد بما
شقيت به وإمّا رجل عمل فيه بمعصية الله فكنت عونًا له على معصيته وليس أحد
هذين حَقيقًا أن تؤثره على نفسك. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 805
3.383 Don't use the sharpness of your tongue against the one who gave
you speech, nor the eloquence of your words against the one who gave you
direc- tion. 3.384 To avoid doing what you dislike in others is
discipline enough.1 3.385 Endure with the free or grow fat with the
heedless.
AnotherreportstatesthatʿAlī,offeringhiscondolences,saidthefollowingtoal-Ashʿath
ibn Qays: You can endure like the noble or grow fat like sheep.2 3.386
Describing the world, ʿAlī said: The world betrays, and harms, and
passes---God has rejected her both as reward for his devotees and as
punishment for his enemies. People in the world are like a band of
travelers---no sooner do they set up camp than the cameleer gives the
call to depart. 3.387 ʿAlī said to his son Ḥasan:3 My dear son, do not
leave your wealth for others to inherit, for your heir will be one of
two men: a man who will use it to obey God, in which case he will earn
happiness where you earned only misery, or a man who uses it to disobey
God, in which case you will have aided him in his disobedience. Neither
deserves more consideration from you than you give to yourself. 1 §3.348
is similar. 2 From ʿAlī's expressions of condolence to al-Ashʿath ibn
Qays on the death of his son (Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, ʿIqd, 3:255). See also
ʿAlī's expressions of condolence to Ashʿath on the death of his brother
in §3.89, and of his son in §3.277. "To be fat like sheep (istalā)" is
said of one who does not take a lesson from seeing death and prepare
more diligently for the hereafter. Another translation is "to be
forgetful like sheep." The commentators note that the Abbasid poet Abū
Tammām echoed this saying explicitly citing ʿAlī in his verse: "ʿAlī
said to Ashʿath in condo- lence, fearing that he may otherwise sin: Will
you take solace and endure this trial---and if you do, you shall be
rewarded---or will you be heedless and grow fat like sheep" وقال عليّ في
التعازي لأشعث وخاف عليه بعض تلك المآثم أتصبر للبلـ ـوى عـ ـزاء وحسبـ ـة
فتؤجـ ـر أم تسلـ ـو سلـ ـوّالبهائـ ـم Ḥ19:50; F 455; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih,
ʿIqd, 3:255; Abū Tammām, Dīwān, 3:258--259. 3 Kulaynī (Kāfī, 8:72) cites
part of this text in a letter from ʿAlī to his freedman, who,
dissatisfied with ʿAlī's offer to help him financially from his personal
stipend, went to Muʿāwiyah to ask for money. Similar line in §3.400.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 806 Text and
Translation ويروى هذا الكلام على وجه آخر وهو أمّا بعد. فإنّ الذي في يديك
من الدنيا قد كان له أهل قبلك وهو صائر إلى أهل بعدك وإنّما أنت جامع لأحد
رجلين رجل عمل فيما جمعته بطاعة الله فسعد بما شقيت به أو رجل عمل فيه
بمعصية الله فشقي بما جمعت له وليس أحد هذين أهل ً ا أن تؤثره على نفسك
وتحمل له على ظهرك فٱرجُ لمن مضى رحمة الله ولمن بقي رزق الله. 3.388وقال
عليه السلام لقائل قال بحضرته ⟩أستغفر الله⟨ ث َ
ةّتسىلععقاومسٱوهو١نيّـيّلِعلاةجردرافغتسالا ّنإرافغتسالااميردتأك ُ ّمُأ َكْتَ لِك
معانٍ أوّلهاالندمعلىمامضىوالثانيالعزمعلىتركالعودإليهأبدًاوالثالثأنتؤدّيإلى
المخلوقينحقوقهمحتّىتلقىاللهأمل َ سليسعليكتَب ِ عةوالرابعأنت َ عمِدإلىكلّ
فريضة ُ تفتح ُ ّسلاىلعتبنيذلا٢محللاىلإدمعتنأسماخلاواهّقحيّدؤتفاهتعّيضكيلع
ذيبه ُ ت نأ سداسلاو .ديدج محل امهنيب أشنيو مظعلاب دلِجلا قَصلَ ي ىّتح
نازحألاب ذيق الجسم ألم الطاعةكما أذقته حلاوة المعصية فعند ذلك تقول
أستغفر الله. 3.389وقال عليه السلام: الحلم عشيرة.
3.390وقالعليهالسلام:مسكينٌ ٱبنآدممكتومالأجلمكنونالعللمحفوظالعمل .ةقرَعلا
هنِتنُ تو ةقرَ ّشلا هلتقتو ةّقـَ بلا هملؤت 3.391وروي أنّه عليه السلام كان
جالسًا في أصحابه فمرّت بهم ٱمرأة جميلة فر َ مَقها القوم بأبصارهم فقال عليه
السلام إنّ أبصار هذه الفُحول طَوامح وإنّ ذلك سبب هِبابها فإذا نظر أحد كم إلى
ٱمرأة تعجبه .ةأرمٱكةأرمٱ يه امّنإف هلهأ سِمالُ يْـلَ ف ١ش، ن، ي، ھ، وزيادة في
م: كذا. أصل م: ⟩أتدري ما الاستغفار درجة النبيّين⟨. ٢ش،
ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحةفيم:كذا.أصلم: ⟩الشحم⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 807
This text is also narrated in the following variant rendering: All the
worldly riches your hands possess have had other masters before you and
will pass to other masters after you. You gather riches for one of two
men: a man who will use it to obey God, in which case he will earn
happiness where you earned only misery, or a man who will use it to
disobey God, in which case you will have aided him in his disobedience.
Neither deserves more consider- ation from you than you give to
yourself. Neither is worth your carrying their
sinsonyourback.Instead,beseechGod'smercyforthosewhohavepassed,and
solicit God's sustenance for those who remain. 3.388 A man uttered the
dictum, ⟨I beg God's forgiveness!⟩in ʿAlī's presence, and ʿAlī rebuked
him, saying:
Mayyourmotherbebereaved!DoyouknowwhatitmeanstobegGod'sforgive- ness?
That is the lofty state of the angels, and it requires six actions: The
first is to regret what you have done. The second is to resolve never to
do it again. The third is to give back to all God's creatures what you
owe them, so that you can meet God with a smooth and unburdened back.
The fourth is to make up for every mandated act that you have squandered
and give it its full due. The fifth is to target the unlawfully
nourished flesh in your body and melt it away by grieving, until, after
your skin touches your bones, new flesh grows and fills it out. The
sixth is to force your body to taste the pain of good deeds, just as you
let it taste the sweetness of sin. Then you can truthfully say: I beg
God's forgiveness! 3.389 Clemency generates kinship. 3.390 How wretched
is the son of Adam! Lifespan unknown, ailments con- cealed, actions
recorded; he hurts from the sting of a gnat, chokes from a sip of water,
and stinks from a drop of sweat. 3.391 It is related that ʿAlī was
sitting among his associates when a beautiful woman passed. The men's
eyes followed her, and ʿAlī exclaimed:1 O how covetous the eyes of these
virile stallions---they stare and they throb! If your eyes fall on an
attractive woman, people, go home and embrace your wife, for a woman is
a woman! 1 Presumablyin Kufa,betweentheemergenceof
theKharijites---whoarementionedhere---in 37/657 and the Battle of
Nahrawān in 38/658 when they were killed. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 808 Text
and Translation مالسلا هيلع لاقف هولتقيل موقلا بثوف ههَقْفَأ ام اً رفاك هللا
هلتاق جراوخلا نم لجر لاقف رُوَيدًا إنمّا هو سَب ّ بسب ّ أو عفو عن ذنب.
3.392وقال عليه السلام: كفاك من عقلك ما أوضح لك سبيل غَيّك من رشدك.
3.393ريثكهليلقو ريبكهريغص ّنإف اً ئيش هنم اورقحت الو ريـخلا اولعفا
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو ولايقولنّ أحد كمإنّ
أحدًاأولىبفعلالخـيرمنّيفيكونواللهكذلكإنّ للخيروالشرّأهل ً ا فما تركتموه
منهما كفاكموه أهله. 3.394وقال عليه السلام: من أصلح سريرته أصلح الله له
علانيته ومن عمل لدينهكفاه الله أمر دنياه ومن أحسن فيما بينه وبين الله
كفاه الله ما بينه وبين الناس. 3.395وقال عليه السلام: الحلم غطاء ساتر
والعقل حسام قاطع فٱستر خَل َ ل خُلقك بحلمك وقات ِ ل هواك بعقلك. 3.396وقال
عليه السلام: إنّ لله عبادًا يختصّهم بالنعم لمنافع العباد في ُ قِرّها في
أيديهم ما بذلوها فإذا منعوها نزعها منهم ثمّحوّلها إلى غيرهم. 3.397ً فاعُم
هارَ ت انيَ ب ىنغلاو ةيفاعلا نيتلصخب قثي نأ دبعلل يغبني ال :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو ى .رقتفٱ ذإ اً ّينغ هارت انيَ بوَمِقَس ذإ
3.398وقالعليهالسلام:مَنشكاالحاجةإلىمؤمنفكأنّماشكاهاإلىاللهومنشكاها إلى
كافر فكأنّما شكا الله. 3.399وقال عليه السلام في بعض الأعياد .ديع موي وهف
هيف هللا ىصعُ ي ال موي ّلكو همايق ركشو همايص هللا لبق نملٌديع وه امّنإ
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 809
A Kharijite muttered, "May God fight this heretic, how well he
understands!" People jumped on him to slay him, and ʿAlī held them back,
saying: Slow down! You can either return his curse with another curse or
pardon his offence. 3.392 Your intellect gives you enough guidance if it
distinguishes error from direction. 3.393 Do good and don't think any
deed too humble, for a small deed is large in value and though little it
counts for a lot. No one among you should say that so-and-so is better
able to do good than I, else, by God, it will be so. Both good and evil
have their adherents---whatever you leave off doing, others will step
forward to do. 3.394 If someone sets right his thoughts, God sets right
his behavior. If some- one strives for his religion, God takes care of
his needs. If someone steps for- ward to serve God, God helps him in his
dealings with people. 3.395
Forbearanceisacurtainthatconceals,andintelligenceisakeenblade--- veil
your flaws by exercising forbearance and fight your passions by using
your intelligence. 3.396 God has singled out some servants for
particular blessings to use for the benefit of all---he leaves them in
their hands as long as they do. If they don't, he takes them back and
entrusts them to others. 3.397 There are two things no one should take
for granted: health and wealth. You see a man healthy one day and
suddenly he is taken ill. You see a man wealthy one day and suddenly he
loses all his money. 3.398
TocomplaintoabelieveristocomplaintoGod.Tocomplaintoanunbe- liever is to
complain about God. 3.399 On a certain feast day, ʿAlī declared: The
blessing of Eid is for those whose fast God accepts and whose worship he
rewards. In fact, every day in which God is not disobeyed is Eid.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 810 Text and
Translation 3.400وقال عليه السلام: إنّ أعظم الحسرات يوم القيامة حسرة رجل
كسب مالًا في غير طاعة الله فورّثه رجل ً ا فأنفقه في طاعة الله فدخل به
الجنّة ودخل به الأوّل النار. 3.401يف هندب َقلخَأ لجر اً يعس مهَبيخَأوًةقفَص
سانلا رسخأ ّنإ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو طلب آماله ولم تساعده المقادير على
إرادته فخرج من الدنيا بحسرته وقدم على الآخرة .هتَعِبَ تب 3.402وقال عليه
السلام: الرزق رزقان طالب ومطلوب فمن طلب الدنيا طلبه الموت حتّى يُخرجه عنها
ومن طلب الآخرة طلبته الدنيا حتّى يستوفي رزقه منها. 3.403وقال عليه السلام:
إنّ أولياء الله هم الذين نظروا إلى باطن الدنيا إذا نظر الناس إلى ظاهرها
وٱشتغلوا بآجِلها إذا ٱشتغل الناس بعاجلها فأماتوا منها ما خشوا أن يميتهم
وتركوا منها ما علموا أنّه سيتركهم ورأوا ٱستكثار غيرهم منها ٱستقلالًا ودَرَ
كَهم لها ف َ وتًا أعداء ما سالم َ الناس ُ اوملُ ع هبو باتكلا ملُ ع مهب سانلا
ىداع ام ُ ملِسو .نوفاخي ام قوف اً فوخم الو نوجري ام قوف اً ّوجرَم نورَ ي ال
اوماق هبو باتكلا ماق مهبو 3.404وقال عليه السلام: اذ .تاعِبَ ّتلا ءاقبو
تاّذللا عاطقنٱ اورك 3.405َ ت ْرُ بْخُأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو قْل ِ هْ. ومن الناس من
يروي هذا لرسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله وممّا يقوّي أنّه من كلام أمير
المؤمنين عليه السلام ما حكاه ث َ عْل َ تلقل⟨هلقت ربخأ⟩ لاق اً ّيلع ّنأ
الول نومأملا لاق ّيبارعألا نبٱ نع ب ⟩أَقْل ِ .⟨ْرُ بْـخَتْه al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 811 3.400 The greatest remorse on judgment day will be felt
by a man who earned his wealth through God's disobedience and bequeathed
it to an heir who spent itin his
obedience---theheirwillentertheGarden,themanwillentertheFire.1 3.401 The
biggest loser, the worst failure, is a man who wears down his body to
satisfy his desires, but destiny does not side with him---he leaves the
world with only remorse and arrives in the hereafter with a burden of
sin. 3.402 Sustenanceisof
twotypes:onethatseeksandonethatissought.Seekers of the world are sought
by death, and death will expel them from her. Seekers of the hereafter
are sought by the world, and she will give them her full share.2 3.403
God's special devotees are those who perceive the world's reality when
others are deceived by her appearance. They occupy themselves with what
is coming when others occupy themselves with the present.They kill
desires they fear will kill them and reject pleasures they know will
reject them. They find wealth of meager benefit, and other men's gain as
loss. They deem the world an enemy when others deem it an ally. They
deem the hereafter an ally when others deem it an enemy. God's Book is
recognized through them, and they are recognized through God's Book.
God's Book is established through them, and they are established through
God's Book.They see nothing more desirable than what they desire and
nothing more terrifying than what they fear.3 3.404 Remember that
pleasures pass, and consequences remain. 3.405 Put people to the test
and you will come to hate them. Raḍī: Some people attribute these lines
to God's Messenger, but what supports its attri- bution to the Commander
of the Faithful is Thaʿlab's narration on the authority of Ibn
al-Aʿrābī, who reported: Maʾmūn stated: If ʿAlī had not said "Put people
to the test and you will come to hate them (ukhbur taqlih)," I would
have said, "Hate people and you will have an incentive to test them
(aqlih takhbur)."4 1 Similar line in §3.387. 2 First line identical in
§3.358. 3 This text is attributed to Jesus in Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat, 1:10.
4 §3.405 is attributed to the Prophet in Quḍāʿī, Shihāb, §4.8. Thaʿlab
and Ibn al-Aʿrābī were grammarians. Maʾmūn was an Abbasid caliph.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 812 Text and
Translation 3.406وقال عليه السلام: ما كان الله ليفتح على عبد باب الشكر
ويغلق عنه باب الزيادة ولا ليفتح على عبد باب الدعاء ويغلق عنه باب الإجابة
ولا ليفتح على عبد باب التوبة ويغلق عنه باب المغفرة. 3.407وسئل عليه
السلام أيّما أفضل العدل أو الجود فقال العدل يضع الأمور مواضعها والجود
يخرجها عن جهتها والعدل سائس عامّ والجود عارض خاص ّ فالعدل أشرفهما
وأفضلهما. 3.408وقال عليه السلام: الناس أعداء ما جهلوا. 3.409وقال عليه
السلام: الزهد كلّه بين كلمتين من القرآن قال الله عزوجلّ ﴿ل ِّ َ لْ يَك ا َ لَ
عْاْوَس ْأَت ى ٰ َ تاَ ف اَم كُمْ وَلَا ت َ فْر َ حُواْبِم َ آ آتَىٰكُمْ﴾ومن لم يأس َ على
الماضي ولم يفرح بالآتي .هيَ فَ رَطب دهزلا ذخأ دقف 3.410وقال عليه السلام:
الوِلايات مَضامير الرجال. 3.411وقال عليه السلام: ما أنقض النوم لعزائم
اليوم. 3.412وقال عليه السلام: ليس بلد بأحقّ بك من بلد خير البلاد ما حملك.
3.413وقال عليه السلام وقد جاءه ن َ عْي الأشتر رحمه الله مَال ِ كٌ وما مَال ِ
كٌ لو كان جبل ً ا لكان فِنْدًا لا يرتقيه الحافر ولا يوفي عليه الطائر.
⟩الفند⟨المنفرد من الجبال. 3.414وقال عليه السلام: قليلٌ مَدوم عليه خير من
كثير مملول منه. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 813
3.406 When God has opened the door of gratitude for you, he will not
close the door of increase. When he has opened the door of prayer for
you, he will not close the door of fulfillment. When he has opened the
door of repentance for you, he will not close the door of forgiveness.1
3.407 ʿAlī was asked, "Which is better, justice or generosity?" and he
replied: Justice puts things in their rightful place, while generosity
takes things out of their proper sphere. Justice is a universal
motivator, while generosity is a par- ticular aspect. Justice is thus
the nobler and better of the two. 3.408 People hate the unfamiliar.2
3.409 The whole of renunciation is encompassed in two injunctions from
the Qurʾan: «Do not weep over what you have lost, and do not exult over
what you
havegained.»3Thosewhodon'tweepoverthepastorexultoverwhattheyhave gained
have grasped renunciation from both sides. 3.410 Rulership is the
racecourse where men show their mettle. 3.411 How completely does sleep
crush the resolutions of the day!4 3.412 No land is better for you than
another---the best land is one that sustains you. 3.413 When news
arrived of Mālik al-Ashtar's death, ʿAlī exclaimed:5 Mālik, O Mālik, O
what a man! If he were a mountain, he would be a towering peak that no
hoof could ascend, no bird fly over. Raḍī: "A towering peak ( find)" is
a mountain that soars above all others. 3.414 A little done often is
better than a lot you tire of.6 1 Similar to §3.407. Reference to
Qurʾan, Nisāʾ 4:60, 110, Ibrāhīm 14:7. 2 §3.156 is identical. 3 Qurʾan,
Ḥadīd 57:23. 4 From ʿAlī's oration §1.237 (one of the early additions to
Raḍī's original Nahj a-balāghah), pre- sumably delivered in Kufa, after
the arbitration in 37/658. 5 In Kufa, 38/658. ʿAlī had sent Ashtar to
replace Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr as governor of Egypt and he was poisoned
en route by Muʿāwiyah's agent. Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 282--283. 6 §3.271 is
similar. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 814 Text and
Translation 3.415وقال عليه السلام: إذا كان في الرجل خُل ّ ة رائعة
فٱنتظروا أخواتها. 3.416وقال عليه السلام لغالب بن صَعصعة أبي الفرزدق في
كلام دار بينهما ما فعلت إبلك الـكثيرة. قال ذَعْذَعَتْها الحقوق يا أمير
المؤمنين فقال صلوات الله عليه ذلك أحمدُسبلها.١ 3.417وقال عليه السلام: من
عظّم صغار المصائب ٱبتلاه الله بكبارها. 3.418وقال عليه السلام: من كرمت
عليه نفسه هانت عليه شهوته. 3.419وقال عليه السلام: ما مَزح رجل٢ مَزحة إلّا
مَجّمن عقله مَجّة. 3.420وقال عليه السلام: زهدك في راغب فيك نقصان حظ ّ ورغبتك
في زاهد فيك ذلّ نفس. 3.421وقال عليه السلام: ما لٱبن آدم والفخر أوّله نطفة
وآخره جيفة لا يرزق نفسه ولا يدفع حتفه. 3.422وقال عليه السلام: الغنى
والفقر بعد العرض على الله. 3.423وسئل عليه السلام عن أشعر الشعراء فقال إنّ
القوم لم يجروا في حَلْبة تعرف الغاية عند ق َ ِ لَ ملاف ّدب الو ناك نإف
اهتبَص ك الضِّلّيل. يريد ٱمرأ القيس.
١ن،م،ش،ھ:كذا.ي،وزيادةفيهامشم،ش:أضيفتكلمة:وقالعليهالسلام ⟩منٱتّجر
بغيرفقهٍٱرتطمفيالربا⟨. ٢ش،ن،ي،ھ:كذا.م: ⟩ٱمرؤ⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter
3: Sayings 815 3.415 If a man possesses one brilliant quality, expect to
see others. 3.416 ʿAlī said to Ghālib ibn Ṣaʿṣaʿah, Farazdaq's father,
during a longer conversation:1 What happened to your large herd of
camels? Ghālib replied, "The winds of duty have scattered them,
Commander of the Faithful," and ʿAlī responded: That is the most
admirable path they could have taken.2 3.417 If someone makes much ado
about small trials, God will afflict him with large ones. 3.418 The
self-respecting don't follow their passions. 3.419 Each time a man
spurts out a joke, he spits out a bit of his brain. 3.420 If you spurn a
person who wants you, you reduce your designated share. If you want a
person who spurns you, you humiliate yourself. 3.421 How, O son of Adam,
are you entitled to conceit? You began as a drop of semen and will end
as a rotting corpse. You cannot sustain your life, nor can you fight off
your death.3 3.422 Who is wealthy and who is poor will be known after
God's accounting. 3.423 Asked who was the best poet, ʿAlī replied: Poets
don't all race on the same track, so we can't speak about who reached
the goalpost first. But if you insist on an answer, I choose the
Wandering King. Raḍī: He meant Imruʾ al-Qays. 1 In Kufa, sometime during
ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661 (Ḥ20:96). Farazdaq is the famous poet.
2 ms Y adds another saying here: "Whoever trades without knowing the law
becomes mired in usury." 3 Mubarrad, Kāmil, 2:11: Abū al-ʿAtāhiyah
(Dīwān, 178) paraphrased this saying in four verses: ما أحمق الإنسان في
فخره وهو غدًا في حفرة يقبر مـ ـا بـ ـال مـ ـن أوّلـ ـه نطفـ ـة وجيفــة
آخــره يفخــر أصبح لا يملك تقديـ ـم مـ ـا يرجو ولا تأخير مـ ـا يحـ ـذر
وأصبح الأمـ ـر إلـ ـى غيـ ـره في كلّ ما يقضى وما يقدر al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 816 Text
and Translation 3.424اّلإ نمث مكسفنأل سيل هّنإ اهلهأل ةظامُ ّللا هذه عديٌّرُح
الأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو الجنّة فلا تبيعوها إلّا بها. 3.425وقال عليه السلام:
علامة الإيمان أن تؤثر الصدق حيث يضرّك على الـكذب حيث ينفعك وألّا يكون في
حديثك ف َ ضلٌ عن عملك وأن تتّقي الله في حديث غيرك. 3.426.ريبدتلا يف ةفآلا
نوكت ىّتح ريدقتلا ىلع رادقِ ملا بلغي :مالسلا هيلع لاقو وقد مضى هذا المعنى
فيما تقدّم برواية تخالف بعض هذه الألفاظ. 3.427.ةّمهلاّولع امهجتنُ ي نامأوَ ت
ةانألاو ملحلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو 3.428وقال عليه السلام: الغيبة جهد
العاجز. 3.429وقال عليه السلام: رُب .هيف لوقلا نسحب نوتفم َ ّ al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Chapter 3: Sayings 817
3.424 Is there no free man who will leave these chewed-up scraps for the
glut- tons? There is no price high enough for your souls except
paradise---don't sell them for anything less. 3.425 True belief is this:
to prefer a truth that hurts you over a falsehood that benefits you, to
ensure that your words don't outpace your deeds, and to fear God when
speaking about others. 3.426 The fates vanquish all---sometimes too much
planning can lead to pain. Raḍī: This saying was recorded earlier with
some variant words.1 3.427 Clemency and patience are twins born of lofty
aspirations.2 3.428 Slander is the enterprise of the weak. 3.429 Many
are seduced by praise. 1 §3.12. 2 In praise of the Persian emperor
Anūshīrwān. Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 380; Muwaffaq biʾllāh, Iʿtibār, 576.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 زيادة على الأصل١
3.430وقال عليه السلام: الدنيا خُلقت لغيرها ولم تخلق لنفسها. 3.431وقال
عليه السلام: إنّ لبني أميّة مِرْوَدًا يجرون فيه ولو قد ٱختلفوا فيما بينهم
ثمّكادتهم الضباع لغلبتهم. والمرود هنا مفعل من الإرواد وهو الإمهال
والإنظار وهذا من أفصح الكلام وأغربه فكأنّه عليه السلام شبّه المهلة التي هم
فيها بالمضمار ال ّ ذي يجرون فيه إلى الغاية فإذا بلغوا منقطعها ٱنتقض
نظامهم بعدها. 3.432ّ بَرُ ي امك مالسإلا اوَ ّبَر هللاو مه :راصنألا حدم يف
مالسلا هيلع لاقو ى الفُلوّمع غنائهم بأيديهم السِّباط وألسنتهم السِّلاط.
١أضيفتفيبعضالمخطوطاتقبلالخاتمةأوبعدهازيادةعلىالأصلقديمة،وهيعبارةعن سبع
عشرةكلمة لعليّ، مسبوقة في أقدم المخطوطات بسطر يشير الى أنها زائدة على
الأصل: ش: ⟩زيادةمننسخةكتبتفيعهدالمصنّف⟨)ملاحظةعنش:ثبتتالزياداتمن§١إلىوسط
§٤،حيثفقدتبعدهاصفحةمنالمخطوطة(.ن: ⟩زيادةكتبتمننسخةسريّةعراقيّة⟨.ي: ⟩زيادة
من نسخةكتبت على عهد المصنّف رحمه الله⟨. والزيادة لم تثبت في م، أو في شرح
ٱبن الفندق المؤل ّ ف سنة ٢٥٥ هجريّة وهو من أقدم الشروح. وأُثبتت الزيادة
بلا فاصلة أو تنبيه في أكثر المخطوطات التالية في الزمن، و كذلك في بعض
الشروح مثل شرح الراوندي ّ . والرضيّ كان قد ترك فراغات لإثبات زيادات في
نهايةكلّ من الأبواب الثلاثة للكتاب، وذ كر هذا الأمر في خاتمته للكتاب.
وقيل إن الزيادة التي بين أيدينا أُثبتت في حياة الرضيّ وبإمضائه: قال
ٱبنأبيالحديد ) ٠٢:٠٨١ (:
⟩ثمّوجدنانسخًاكثيرةفيهازياداتبعدهذاالكلامقيلإنّهاوجدت فينسخةكتبتفيحياةالرضيّ
رحمهاللهوقرئتعليهفأمضاهاوأذنفيإلحاقهابالكتابونحن نذ كرها⟨. وقال البحرانيّ
) ٩٢٠١ (: ⟩أقول إنّه رضوان الله عليه بلغ في ٱختيار كلامه عليه السلام إلى
هذه الغاية وقطعه عليها ثمّكتبت على عهده زيادة من محاسن الكلمات إمّا
بٱختياره هو أو
بعضمنكانيحضرهمنأهلالعلموتلكالزيادةتارةتوجدخارجةعنالمتنوتارةموضوعة
فيهملحقةبمنقطعٱختياره.ورويأنّهاقرئتعليهوأمربإلحاقهابالمتن⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Additional Sayings1
3.430 The world was created not for herself but for another. 3.431 The
Umayyads have a short stretch in which to race ahead. Once they quarrel,
the hyenas will strike. Raḍī: "Reprieve (mirwad)" is the mifʿal form
derived from the verbal noun irwād, which means "delay (imhāl)" and
"respite (inẓār)." This is among the most eloquent of usages and the
most wondrous. ʿAlī compared the reprieve they have been given to a
race- course in which they race toward the goal; once they reach it,
their government will collapse. 3.432 ʿAlī said in praise of the Allies:
By God, they nurtured Islam as one would a prize colt, with generous
hands and eloquent tongues. 1 An additional seventeen sayings---perhaps
added by Raḍī, or by others---are transcribed in some of our primary and
secondary manuscripts and commentaries (details in footnote to the
present edition, and in the Note on the Edition and Translation)
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 820 Text and
Translation 3.433وقال عليه السلام: العين وِ .ِه َ ّسلاُءاك
وهذهمنالاستعاراتالعجيبةكأنّهشبّهالسهبالوعاءوالعينبالوكاءفإذاأطلقالوكاءلمينضبط
الوعاء وهذا القول في الأشهر الأظهر من كلام النبيّ صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
وقد رواه قوم لأمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وذ كر ذلك المبرّد في كتاب المقتضب
في باب اللفظ بالحروف وقد تكلّمنا على هذه الاستعارة في كتابنا الموسوم
بمجازات الآثار النبويّة. 3.434وقال عليه السلام في كلام له: ووليهم والٍ
فأقام وٱستقام حتّى ضرب الدين بجِرانه. 3.435وقال عليه السلام: يأتي على
الناس زمان عَضوض ي َ عَض ِ سوُ ملا ّ ر فيه على ما في يديه ولم ضَفْلااُوَسْنَ
تاَلَو﴿ هناحبسهللالاقكلذبرمؤي َ نْيَ ب َل ْ َ هْنَ ي.﴾ْمُك دفيهالأشراروي ُ ستذَلّ
فيهالأخيار َ يابُ يو ع المضطرّون وقد نهى رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
عن بيع المضطرّين. 3.436وقال عليه السلام: يَهل ِ بحُم نالجر َ ّيِف ك ّ مُطْرٍ
وباهِت ٌ مفترٍ. وهذا مثل قوله عليه السلام: هلك فيّ رجلان محب ّ غالٍ ومبغض
قالٍ. 3.437وسئل عليه السلام عن التوحيد والعدل فقال: التوحيد أن لا تتوهّمه
والعدل أن لا تتّهمه. 3.438وقال عليه السلام: إنّه لا خير في الصمت عن الح ُ
كم كما أنّه لا خير في القول بالجهل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Additional Sayings 821
3.433 The eye is a leather strap fastening the buttocks. Raḍī: This is
among the most wondrous of metaphors, as though he likened the but-
tocks to a vessel and the eye to a leather strap---if the strap is
loosened (i.e., if the eye is closed in sleep), the vessel is not held
fast (i.e., it can emit involuntary secretions). In most narrations,
this saying is attributed to the Prophet, but some have attributed it to
the Commander of the Faithful, such as Mubarrad, in his Book of
Extemporane- ous Discourse (Kitāb al-Muqtaḍab), in the chapter on speech
with single syllables. I
havealsodiscussedthismetaphorinmybook,FigurativeLanguageof
PropheticHadith (Majāzāt al-āthār al-nabawiyyah). 3.434 ʿAlī said in an
oration: Then a certain ruler came to rule them. He stood them upright
and he himself stayed upright, until religion, like a docile camel, laid
its neck flat on the earth. 3.435 A time like a gnashing camel will come
upon the people, when the rich will grip onto their wealth by their
teeth, even though they have been commanded other- wise, for God has
said, «Do not forget to be generous to one another».1 At this time, the
wicked will rise, while the virtuous will be humiliated, and the
helpless will be forced to sell their goods for a pittance, despite the
prohibition by God's Messenger. 3.436 Two kinds of men are damned
because of how they feel about me: one who praises too lavishly, and one
who slanders and lies. Raḍī: This is similar to his saying: Two kinds of
men are damned because of how they feel about me: one is excessive in
his love, the other is extreme in his hatred.2 3.437 ʿAlī was asked
about God's oneness and justice, and he replied: Declaring God's
onenessmeansnotimagininghim,anddeclaringhisjusticemeansneveraccusinghim.
3.438 There is no benefit in keeping silent when you can offer wisdom,
just as there is no benefit in speaking words of ignorance.3 1 Qurʾan,
Baqarah 2:237. 2 §3.107. 3 Similar to §3.166. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 822 Text
and Translation 3.439وقال عليه السلام في دعاء ٱستسقى به: اللّٰهمّ ٱسقنا ذُل
ُ ل السحائب دون صِعابها. وهذا من الكلام العجيب الفصاحة وذلك أنّه عليه
السلام شبّه السحائب ذوات الرعود والبوارق والرياح والصواعق بالإبل الصعاب
التي ت َ قمُص برحالها وتتوقّص بركبانها وشبّه السحاب الخالية من تلك الروائع
بالإبل الذلل التي تُحتل َ ب طَيِّعة وت ُ قتعَد مُسمِحة. 3.440وقيل له عليه
السلام: لو غيّرت شيبك يا أمير المؤمنين فقال: الخِضاب زينة ونحن قوم في
مصيبة. يريد برسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله. 3.441وقال عليه السلام:
القناعة مال لا ينفد. وقد روى بعضهم هذا الكلام عن النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله. 3.442وقال عليه السلام لزياد بن أبيه وقد ٱستخلفه لعبد الله بن
العبّاس على فارس وأعمالها فيَ حلاوفسَعلارذحٱولدعلالمعتسا:جارخلام ُ
ّدقتنعهيفهاهنامهنيبناكليوطمالكيف .فيسلا ىلإ وعدي فيحلاو ءالَ جلاب دوعي
فسعلا ّنإف 3.443وقال عليه السلام: أشدّ الذنوب ما ٱستخف ّ به صاحبه.
3.444نأ ملعلا لهأ ىلع ذخأ ىّتح اومّ لعتي نأ لهجلا لهأ ىلع هللا ذخأ ام
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو .اومّ لعُ ي 3.445وقال عليه السلام: شرّالإخوان مَن ت ُ كُل
ِّف له. 3.446وقال عليه السلام: إذا ٱحتشم المؤمن أخاه فقد فارقه. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Additional Sayings 823
3.439 ʿAlī intoned in a prayer for rain: God, send us docile rainclouds,
not unruly ones that bolt. Raḍī: This is an amazingly eloquent saying.
He likened rainclouds that have thunder,
lightning,andhailwithunrulycamelsthathurloff theirsaddlesandthrowoff
theirrid- ers. He likened clouds that do not bring these frightening
phenomena to docile camels that are easy to milk and pleasant to ride.
3.440 Someone asked ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, why don't you dye
your white hair? (meaning in battle), and he replied: Dyeing your hair
is a form of adornment, and we are a people in mourning. Raḍī: He means
after the death of God's Messenger. 3.441 Contentment is wealth that
never runs out.1 Raḍī: Some people attribute this saying to the Prophet.
3.442 When ʿAlī replaced ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās with Ziyād ibn Abīhi as
governor of Fars and its environs, he had a lengthy conversation with
Ziyād in which he forbade
himfromcollectingthelandtaxbeforeitcamedue,andhewarned:Practicejusticeand
bewareviolenceormisappropriation,forviolenceleadstopeoplefleeingenmasse,and
misappropriation calls people to arms. 3.443 The worst sin is one its
perpetrator thinks insignificant.2 3.444 God has not required the
ignorant to learn without first requiring the learned to teach. 3.445
The worst friend is one in whose company you feel constrained. 3.446 If
a believer shames his brother, he has disowned him. 1 Identical to §3.50
and §3.332. 2 Similar to §3.331. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 824 Text and
Translation وهذا حين ٱنتهى الغاية بنا إلى قطع المختار من كلام أمير
المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه حامدين لله سبحانه على ما مَنّ به من توفيقنا لضمّ
ما ٱنتشر من أطرافه وتقريب ما بعد من أقطاره ومقرّرين العزم كما شرطنا أوّلًا
على تفضيل أوراق من البياض في آخر كلّ
بابمنالأبوابليكونلٱقتناصالشاردوٱستلحاقالواردوماعساهأنيظهرلنابعد .ذوذ ُ
ّشلا دعب انيلإ عقيو ضومغلا وما توفيقنا إلّا بالله عليه توكّلنا وهو حسبنا
ونعم الوكيل وذلك في رجب من سنة أربعمائة.١ ١ن: كذا. م: كذا، وسقط التاريخ.
ي: كذا، وأضيفت ⟩والحمد لله وصلواته على رسوله محمّد وآله الطاهرين⟨. ش:
فقدت صفحة تشمل بداية الخاتمة، وثبتت في الصفحة التالية: ⟩ويقع إلينا
الشذوذ ...أربعمائة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Additional Sayings 825
Raḍī's Conclusion Icomeheretotheendof myselectionfromthewordsof
theCommanderof the Faithful. I praise Almighty God who, by his immense
grace, has guided me to gather from these words what was scattered here
and there, and to collect what
wasdispersedfarandwide.Ihavecarriedoutmyresolve---asIhadstatedinthe
beginning---to leave blank pages at the end of each chapter, so that I
may cap- ture therein any strays and add any additional discoveries,
including anything that becomes clear to me after having been obscure or
falls into my hands after being out of sight. I seek my direction from
God. In him I place my trust. He is my refuge, and he is the best
trustee. I write this in the month of Rajab, in the year four hundred
\[1010ad\]. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Glossary
of Names, Places, and Terms This alphabetical list provides dates and
brief biographies for all individuals mentioned in the text of the
present volume, all unnamed interlocutors identi- fied in the notes, and
individuals important to understanding the text who are mentioned in my
Introduction. Also glossed are groups, places, battles, and key terms.1
Aaron (Ar. Hārūn) (fl. 14th c. bc), a prophet in Islam, Moses' brother,
whom he appointed over the Israelites. al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib
ibn Hāshim (d. ca. 32/653), from the Hāshim clan of Quraysh, paternal
uncle of Muḥammad and ʿAlī and eponym of the Abbasid dynasty. al-ʿAbbās
ibn Mirdās al-Sulamī (d. between 18/639 and 35/656), of the Sulaym
tribe, pagan poet and warrior who converted to Islam after Muḥammad's
conquest of Mecca. Abbasids caliphal dynasty that came to power in
132/750 after defeating the Umay- yads and ended in 656/1258 with the
sack of their capital, Baghdad, by the Mon- gols. ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-ʿAbbās (d. 68/686), ʿAlī's cousin, governor, and staunch supporter,
who fought in all his battles, a prolific hadith narrator and esteemed
scholar. ʿAbdallāh ibn Awfah al-Yashkurī See Ibn al-Kawwāʾ ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-Ḥaḍramī (d. ca. 38/658), stepbrother of Ṭalḥah ibn ʿUbaydallāh and
the agent Muʿāwiyah sent to recruit in Basra after the Battle of Ṣiffīn.
Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī was killed by ʿAlī's agent, Jāriyah ibn Qudāmah al-Saʿdī.
(See further: Ḥ4:34--53.) ʿAbdallāh ibn Jaʿfar (d. after 80/699), from
the Hāshim clan of Quraysh, son of Jaʿfar al-Ṭayyār, who was killed in
the Battle of Muʾtah. ʿAbdallāh was ʿAlī's nephew, son- in-law, and
staunch supporter. ʿAbdallāh ibn Mālik ibn Dajnah (or Dujunnah, or
Diḥyah, lived during ʿAlī's r. 35-- 40/656--661), one of ʿAlī's
followers who narrated his words. Not much is said about him in the
sources, as evidenced also by the confusion about his name. (See
further: Ḥ13:18; B 680.) 1 This information has been culled from
multiple sources, including ei2, ei3, EIr, ʿAbd al- Zahrāʾ's
MaṣādirNahjal-balāghah,medievalbiographicaldictionaries,andavarietyof
online sources. Some Nahj al-Balāghah commentators, especially Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd, Baḥrānī, and Rāwandī, and also Ibn Funduq and Mughniyyah,
offer detailed biographies and event narra- tives, and their
commentaries are referenced in parentheses. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 828
glossary of names, places, and terms ʿAbdallāh ibn Masʿūd (d. ca.
32/653), early Companion of Muḥammad and prolific transmitter of hadith,
famed also for his knowledge of the Qurʾan. He opposed ʿUth- mān's
standardization of the holy book. He settled in Kufa, where he taught,
and ʿAlī reportedly encouraged the Kufans to respect Ibn Masʿūd's
teachings. ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays see Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī ʿAbdallāh ibn
Ṣafwān (d. 73/692), from the Jumaḥclan of Quraysh, who fought with
Ṭalḥah and Zubayr at the Battle of the Camel against ʿAlī and escaped
from the bat- tlefield. Later, he became a follower of Ibn al-Zubayr and
was killed with him. (See further: B 652; Ḥ11:125.) ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar
(d. 73/693), son of the second caliph, ʿUmar, brother-in-law of
Muḥammad, and prolific transmitter of hadith. Ibn ʿUmar was among the
handful of prominent Companions who refused to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī
and sat out his battles. ʿAbdallāh ibn Zamaʿah ibn al-Aswad ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib (d. after 40/661), from the Asad clan of Quraysh, one of
ʿAlī's followers, even though ʿAlī had slain his father, uncle, and
brother at the Battle of Badr. Brother of Muḥammad's wife Sawdah bint
Zamaʿah, ʿAbdallāh married a daughter of another of Muḥammad's wives,
Umm Salamah, from her previous marriage. (See further: B 678; Ḥ13:10.)
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Zubayr (d. 73/692), son of the prominent Companion
al-Zubayr ibn al-ʿAwwām, who fought with his father against ʿAlī in the
Battle of the Camel. During Umayyad rule, Ibn al-Zubayr laid claim to
the caliphate and exercised con- trol over the Ḥijāz and Iraq for almost
a decade before being killed by Umayyad forces. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Marwān
(d. 86/705), son of the Umayyad caliph Marwān I and half- brother of the
Umayyad caliph ʿAbd al-Malik. He served under both as governor of Egypt.
ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān (r. 65--86/685--705), Umayyad caliph. ʿAbd
Manāf ibn Quṣayy ibn Kilāb (fl. 6th c. ad), chieftain of Quraysh, whose
son Hāshim was Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's great-grandfather. His other son,
ʿAbd Shams, was the Umayyads' progenitor. ʿAbdal-MuṭṭalibibnHāshim
(d.ca.579ad),patriarchof theHāshimclanof Quraysh, Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's
paternal grandfather. ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalibraised Muḥammad in the first eight
years of his life, after the death of his parents. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn
ʿAttāb ibn Asīd (d. 36/656), from the Umayyad clan, killed fight- ing
against ʿAlī during the Battle of the Camel. (See further: B 651;
Ḥ11:123--124.) ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf (d. ca. 31/652), early Muslim
convert from the Zuhrah clan of Quraysh, key supporter of Abū Bakr's
nomination to the caliphate and presiding member of the Shūrā Council
that elected ʿUthmān. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Ṣafwān (d. after 36/656), from
the Jumaḥclan of Quraysh, fought against ʿAlī at the Battle of the
Camel. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 829 ʿAbd Shams ibn ʿAbd Manāf ibn Quṣayy (fl. 6th
c. ad), chieftain of the Quraysh tribe of Mecca, father of Umayyah, and
great-grandfather of Muʿāwiyah. ʿAbd Shams and Hāshim were twins whose
foreheads were reportedly separated by a sword strike, taken as an omen
for enmity among their descendants. ʿAbduh, Muḥammad (d. 1905), Grand
Mufti of Egypt and Shaykh al-Azhar, author of a brief word-list
commentary on Nahj al-Balāghah, with an important introduction. Abel
(Ar. Hābīl) see Cain and Abel Abraham (Ar. Ibrāhīm) a prophet in Islam,
originator of the Kaʿbah rites. Abraham is the progenitor of the Arabs
and the Jews through his sons Ishmael and Isaac respec- tively. Abū
al-Aʿwar al-Sulamī (fl. 1st/7th c.), son of ʿAmr ibn Sufyān ibn ʿAbd
Shams, com- mander who led Muʿāwiyah's vanguard in the Battle of Ṣiffīn
and served as ʿAmr ibn
al-ʿĀṣ'saidewhenhetookEgyptforMuʿāwiyah.Abūal-Aʿwar'smotherwasChristian,
while his father had fought against Muḥammad at Uḥud. During the early
Muslim conquests, Abū al-Aʿwar served under various Umayyad commanders
in Syria and later remained attached to them. AbūAyyūbal-Anṣārī
(d.ca.52/672),Companionof Muḥammadandsupporterof ʿAlī who participated
in his battles. Abū Ayyūb had taken part in the Muslim conquest of Egypt
and later participated in the Umayyad expedition against Constantinople,
where he died and is buried. (See further: Ḥ10:111--112; B 591--592.)
Abū Bakr ibn Abī Quḥāfah (r. 11--13/632--634), of the Taym clan of
Quraysh, promi- nent Companion of Muḥammad and first of the four Sunni
caliphs. He was the father of Muḥammad's wife ʿĀʾishah. Abū Dharr
al-Ghifārī (d. 32/652), Muḥammad's Companion, ʿAlī's strong supporter,
and pious preacher, exiled by ʿUthmān to Rabadhah for his support of
ʿAlī and his criticism of Umayyad impiety. (See further: Ḥ8:252--262; B
473--474.) Abū Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī (d. ca. 28/649), famous pre-Islamic
poet of the Hudhayl tribe, who probably embraced Islam together with his
tribe in 9/630. Abū Hurayrah al-Dawsī al-Yamānī (d. 59/679), Companion
of Muḥammad and pro- lific transmitter of hadith. Although there are
some contrary reports, it appears that Abū Hurayrah leaned to the
Umayyads. He is said to have been with ʿUthmān when he was killed, held
back from pledging allegiance to ʿAlī, and later supported Muʿāwiyah.
Abū Jahl ʿAmr ibn Hishām (d. 2/624), from the Makhzūm clan of Quraysh,
fierce enemy of Muḥammad, polemically called Abū Jahl: Father of
Ignorance. Abū Jahl was killed fighting against Muḥammad at the Battle
of Badr. (See further: B 776; Ḥ 13:214; F 365.) Abū Juḥayfah Wahb ibn
ʿAbdallāh al-Suwāʾī (d. 74/694), from the ʿĀmir ibn Ṣaʿṣaʿah clan of the
Suwāʾ tribe, who settled in Kufa. Abū Juḥayfah served as chief of ʿAlī's
police force and would stand at the foot of the pulpit when ʿAlī orated.
He narrated hadith from the Prophet and from ʿAlī. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 830
glossary of names, places, and terms Abū Jundub al-Hudhalī (fl. 6th
c. ad), son of Murrah ibn ʿAmr from the Hudhayl tribe, pre-Islamic poet
known as al-Mashʾūm (the Inauspicious One). Abū Lahab ʿAbd al-ʿUzzā ibn
ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib (d. 2/624), Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's paternal uncle and
fierce enemy, assigned by the Qurʾan with his wife to hellfire (Qurʾan,
Masad 111:1--5). Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī, ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays (d. ca.
48/668), ostensibly one of ʿAlī's sup-
portersbutonewhocausedhimgreatharm.AbūMūsāwasanearlyconverttoIslam who
took part in the conquest of Iraq, served as governor of Basra under
ʿUmar and ʿUthmān and as the locally appointed governor of Kufa at the
chaotic end of ʿUth- mān's reign.When ʿAlī instructed him to rally the
Kufans in the lead-up to the Battle of the Camel, Abū Mūsā refused and
ʿAlī dismissed him. He was later imposed on ʿAlī as his representative
in the post-Ṣiffīn arbitration, where he ruled against his master. Abū
Muslim al-Khawlānī (d. ca. 62/682), Yemeni convert to Islam of ascetic
bent, who settled in Syria, an associate of Muʿāwiyah, sent as emissary
to ʿAlī in the lead- up to the Battle of Ṣiffīn. Abū Sufyān ibn al-Ḥarb
(d. 32/653), of the Umayyad clan of the Quraysh tribe of Mecca,
Muʿāwiyah's father, and leader of the Meccan opposition against Muḥam-
mad. Abū Sufyān converted to Islam when the Muslims conquered Mecca and
later participated in the Syrian conquests. (See further: B 776;
Ḥ13:214; F 365.) AbūṬālib ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib ibn Hāshim (d. 620ad),
patriarch of the Hāshim clan of Quraysh, ʿAlī's father, and Muḥammad's
paternal uncle and foster-father, who offered him the clan's protection.
Abū Tharwān (d. after 37/657), ʿAlī's scribe in Kufa. Not much else is
known about him. Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim ibn Sallām al-Harawī (d. 224/838),
prolific philologist from Khurasan who authored works on lexicography,
jurisprudence, Qurʾanic sciences, and hadith. His book titled Gharīb
al-ḥadīth (Rare words in the hadith) became an instant classic. Cited by
Radī in Nahj al-Balāghah. Abū Umāmah al-Bāhilī (d. 86/705), early
convert to Islam and transmitter of hadith. Abū Umāmah served as
intermediary between ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah during and after the Battle of
Ṣiffīn, but the reports are contradictory about where his loyalties lay.
Adam (Ar. Ādam) a prophet in Islam and the first human. ʿAfīf ibnQays
(d.after38/658),fromthetribeof Kindah,remonstratedwithʿAlīabout marching
to Syria, brother of the notorious al-Ashʿath ibn Qays. (See further: R
1:315; B 308.) Age of Ignorance (Ar. Jāhiliyyah) the pre-Islamic period
in which inhabitants of the Arabian Peninsula worshipped idols.
Ignorance here is specifically meant as igno- rance of the one true God.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 831 Ahl al-bayt (lit. "people of the house"),
Muḥammad's family, according to the Shiʿa, his daughter Fāṭimah, her
husband ʿAlī, and their descendants. ʿahd covenant, testament, or
document of appointment. ahl al-dhimmah see protected peoples
AḥmadibnQutaybahal-Hamdānī (fl.late2nd/8thc.),mentionedasnarratorof ora-
tion §1.231, likely from the generation after Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq
(d. 148/765) or the next one, among the leaders and narrators of the
Shiʿa. (See further: Ḥ13:18; B 680.) al-Aḥnaf ibn Qays (d. 72/691),
chieftain of the Tamīm tribe and resident of Basra, who had a reputation
for sagacity and was instrumental in persuading his tribe to accept
Islam. Aḥnaf sat out the Battle of the Camel but fought on ʿAlī's side
at Ṣiffīn. He later allied with the Umayyads to fight against the
Kharijites and Shiʿites. (See further: B 470; Gh 2:253.) Ahwaz(Ar.Ahwāz)
cityintheKhuzistanprovinceof southwesternIranontheDujayl River,
conquered by the Muslims in 17/638. Aḥzāb see Confederates ʿĀʾishah bint
Abī Bakr (d. 58/678), daughter of the first caliph, Abū Bakr, and one of
Muḥammad's wives. She, with Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, led an army against ʿAlī
at the Battle of the Camel. ʿAlāʾ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī (n.d.), who
features in oration §1.207, is an otherwise unknown individual not
mentioned in the sources. Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ11:37) states that the man
was actually named al-Rabīʿ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī and that the name ʿAlāʾ
is an error in Raḍī's transcription. ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (r.
35--40/656--661), Muḥammad's cousin and ward, who married his daughter
Fāṭimah. ʿAlī is the first Shiʿi Imam and the fourth Sunni caliph. (See
details of ʿAlī's biography in Introduction.) ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn
al-Sajjād Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn (d. 95/713), Shiʿi Imam following his father,
martyr of Karbala, al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī. Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn was present with
Ḥusayn at the Battle of Karbala but fell ill and did not take part in
the fight- ing. He later composed a set of supplications, famously known
as al-Ṣaḥīfah al- Sajjādiyyah. ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Zanjī (d. 270/883),
Chief of the Zanj, who led a fifteen-year rebellion of East African
slaves, from 255/869 to 270/883, against the Abbasids, which ravaged
southern Iraq. Allies (Ar. Anṣār, sing. Anṣārī) also translated as
Helpers, the people of Medina from the tribes of Aws and Khazraj who
supported Muḥammad when he migrated there from Mecca. Amalekites (Ar.
ʿamālīq, sing. ʿimlāq) ancient pre-Islamic people, reportedly among the
first speakers of Arabic and residents of Mecca. (See further:
Ḥ10:93--94; B 588; R 2:190; F 304.) Amīr al-Muʾminīn see Commander of
the Faithful al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 832 glossary of names,
places, and terms ʿAmmār ibn Yāsir (d. 37/657), eminent Companion of the
Prophet and staunch sup- porter of ʿAlī who was killed in the Battle of
Ṣiffīn. Muḥammad had prophesied that ʿAmmār would be killed by the
"treacherous party," and the Shiʿa see his death at Ṣiffīn as proof of
Muʿāwiyah's iniquity. (See further: Ḥ10:102--107; B 590.) ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd
Wadd (d. 5/626), of the ʿĀmir ibn Luʾayy tribe, famous pagan warrior
whomʿAlīslewinsinglecombatattheBattleof
theConfederates.(Seefurther:B776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.) ʿAmr ibn Abī Sufyān
(fl. 1st/7th c.), Muʿāwiyah's brother, from the Umayyad clan of Quraysh,
taken captive at the Battle of Badr by ʿAlī. ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ
(d. 43/664), Muʿāwiyah's chief advisor at the Battle of Ṣiffīn, prover-
bial for his cunning. Earlier commander of the Muslim armies that
conquered Egypt during the reign of ʿUmar, ʿAmr was dismissed by ʿUmar
for corruption, but was later governor there for the Umayyads. Before he
accepted Islam, ʿAmr had been one of Muḥammad's fiercest enemies. (See
further: Ḥ6:281--326.) ʿAmr ibn al-Ḥamiq al-Khuzāʿī (d. ca. 50/670),
Companion of Muḥammad and a sup- porter of ʿAlī. He commanded a
battalion in ʿAlī's army at the battles of the Camel and Ṣiffīn. ʿAmr
ibn Salamah al-Hamdānī al-Arḥabī (d. 85/704), resident of Kufa, poet,
and a leader of the Hamdān tribe who participated in the Muslim conquest
of Persia. ʿAmr was ʿAlī's staunch follower, who fought in all his
battles and served as his governor in Isfahan. He was also a follower of
ʿAlī's son Ḥasan. amṣār (sing. miṣr) garrison cities in the early
Islamic period. In ʿAlī's time, the major garrison cities were Kufa and
Basra in Iraq, and Fusṭāṭin Egypt. Initially set up to serve the early
conquests, by his time they had become permanent and important settled
towns in the region. Other towns in Iran and Central Asia are also
identified in ʿAlī's time as housing permanent garrisons, and as such
may be included under this appellation. Anas ibn Mālik al-Anṣārī
(d. 93/712), resident of Medina, Muḥammad's servant from the age of ten,
and prolific narrator of hadith, although Shiʿa sources accuse him of
widespread forgery. Anas was among the handful of prominent Companions
who
refusedtopledgeallegiancetoʿAlīandsatouthisbattles,andwhoalsorefusedwhen
ʿAlī entreated all those who had heard Muḥammad's words about him at
Ghadīr Khumm to testify to what they had heard. Anbar (Ar. Anbār)
pre-Sasanian town on the Euphrates, in western Iraq, conquered by the
Muslims in 12/634, whose ruins are situated 5 kilometers northwest of
pres- ent-day Falluja. Lying on a cultivable plain near the first
navigable canal between the two great rivers, Anbar controlled an
important crossing in early Islamic times.
Itwasalsostrategicallyimportantastheheadof theirrigationsystemof
arablelands in Iraq. Antichrist see Dajjāl al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 833 ʿAqīl ibn Abī Ṭālib (d. ca. 50/670),
ʿAlī's brother, who was vocal in his support for him but for a brief
period accepted funds from Muʿāwiyah. He later rejected Muʿāwiyah's
sponsorship and returned to Medina. (See further: Ḥ11:250--254.) Arabian
Peninsula (Ar. Jazīrat al-ʿArab) Arabia to the ancients, land mass that
proj- ects southwards from the main body of the Middle East, surrounded
on three sides by sea. Important to Muslims as the birthplace of Islam
and its Prophet Muḥam- mad and site of the Holy Mosques of Mecca and
Medina, Arabia was the seat of the Muslim empire for a brief two decades
after Muḥammad. arbitration (Ar. taḥkīm) post-Ṣiffīn adjudication at
Dūmat al-Jandal in Ramaḍān 37/February 658, with Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī and
ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣrepresenting ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah respectively. The
arbitration ended with Abū Mūsā ruling against his master, ʿAlī, and
ʿAmr ruling for his master, Muʿāwiyah. ʿAlī rejected the outcome of the
arbitration, declaring it contrary to the Qurʾan. Ardashīr-khurrah city
in the Fars province of Iran, near Shiraz, surrounded by fer- tile
countryside, built by the Persian emperor Ardashīr (r. 226--240ad) at
the site of the ancient Achaemenid city of Gūr. Conquered by the Muslims
in the early 1st/7th century, Ardashīr-khurrah was renamed Firuzabad in
the 4th/10th century. The site of the ancient city is located three
kilometers east of the new city also named Firuz- abad. ʿArj caravan
stop near Ṭāʾif, between Mecca and Medina (See further: Ḥ13:303.) Asad
tribe in northern Arabia, whose people led a mainly nomadic life in
pre-Islamic times. In the Muslim wars of conquest, the Asad served in
Iraq and Persia. Most set- tled in Kufa, where they evolved from
warriors to men of learning, including many who handed down the Shiʿa
tradition. Smaller groups were incorporated into the Syrian army and
settled near Aleppo. Aʿshā Maymūn (d. ca. 7/629), pre-Islamic poet, one
of the composers of the famous set of long poems known as the Hanging
Odes. al-Aṣbagh ibn Nubātah (d. early 2nd/7th c.), a close companion of
ʿAlī and a pro- lific transmitter of his words, including the famous
testament to Mālik al-Ashtar. An account of the killing of Ḥusayn at
Karbala is also attributed to him. He belonged to the tribe of Tamīm,
was a resident of Kufa, and fought alongside ʿAlī at Ṣif- fīn.
al-Ashʿath ibn Qays (d. 40/661), Kufan noble of the Kindah tribe who
revolted at Muḥammad's death. He later repented and fought for the
Muslims at the Battle of Yarmūk, and he served as governor of Azerbaijan
during ʿAlī's reign. Despite fighting on ʿAlī's side at the Battle of
Ṣiffīn, Ashʿath was instrumental in forcing ʿAlī to accept arbitration
and to appoint Abū Mūsā as arbiter. ʿĀṣimibnZiyādal-Ḥārithī
(d.after36/656),Basranascetic,brotherof ʿAlī'ssupporter ʿAlāʾ or Rabīʿ.
Ashras ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī al-Balawī see Ḥassān ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī
al-Balawī al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 834 glossary of names,
places, and terms Ashtar see Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar Associates of
the Camel (Ar. aṣḥāb al-jamal) see Camel al-Aswad ibn Quṭbah (or
al-Aswad ibn Quṭnah, or al-Aswad ibn Zayd ibn Quṭbah; fl. 1st/6th c.),
commander of the Ḥulwān garrison during ʿAlī's caliphate, named in §2.59
(see note there re the confusion about his genealogy). ʿAyn al-Tamr lit.
wellspring of dates, so called because of its abundant palms, a small
town in Iraq west of the Euphrates, on the frontier between Syria and
Iraq. In early Islamic times, ʿAyn al-Tamr commanded the military
approaches from the western desert to Kufa; it was attacked by
Muʿāwiyah's commander al-Nuʿmān ibn Bashīr al- Anṣārī in 39/659. Today
the town is called Shithāthah and lies 128 kilometers west of Karbala.
Azerbaijan (Ar. Ādharbāyjān or Adhrabījān) Sasanian town in northwest
Iran con- quered by the Muslims in 22/643 under the command of Ḥudhayfah
ibn al-Yamān, an early Companion of Muḥammad and close associate of
ʿAlī. Al-Ashʿath ibn Qays was governor of Azerbaijan during the
caliphates of ʿUthmān and ʿAlī. Badr site of the first pitched battle
between the Muslims and the Meccans, in 2/624, the year after Muḥammad's
migration to Medina. Badr is located 160 kilometers southwest of Medina
and 50 kilometers inland from the Red Sea. Bahrain (Ar. Baḥrayn)
archipelago in the Persian/Arabian Gulf consisting of 33 is- lands
offshore from present-day eastern Saudi Arabia, site of the ancient town
of Tylos. Emperor Ardashīr conquered it in the first half of the third
century ad, and Sasanian control lasted until ca. 6/628, when the
population voluntarily converted to Islam. Also used in the sources to
describe the eastern seaboard of the Arabian Peninsula. Baḥrānī, Maytham
(d. 679/1280), early Twelver Shiʿi commentator of Nahj al-Bal- āghah,
philosopher and theologian active in Bahrain, famous for his
commentaries on the works of Avicenna. Baghdad (Ar.Baghdād) capitalof
theAbbasidcaliphatefromitsfoundingin145/762 until the fall of the
dynasty in 656/1258, with a small interregnum when the capi- tal was in
adjacent Sāmarrāʾ. Located at the confluence of the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers, Baghdad was a major hub for political and intellectual activity.
Raḍī, com- piler of the present volume, lived his entire life in this
city. Basra (Ar. Baṣrah) garrison city founded in 17/638, during the
Islamic conquests of southern Iraq, located near the Shaṭṭal-ʿArab, the
river formed by the confluence of theTigris and Euphrates.The Battle of
the Camel was fought just outside Basra early in ʿAlī's caliphate.
Baṭḥāʾ (The Flatland) see Mecca Battle of Badr see Badr Battle of the
Camel see Camel Battle of the Confederates see Confederates al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 835 Battle of Ḥunayn see Ḥunayn Battle of Khaybar see
Khaybar Battle of Muʾtah see Muʾtah Battle of Nahāwand see Nahāwand
Battle of Nahrawān see Nahrawān Battle of Qādisiyyah see Qādisiyyah
Battle of Ṣiffīn see Ṣiffīn Battle of Uḥud see Uḥud Bayhaqī see Ibn
Funduq al-Bayhaqī Bedouins (Ar. aʿrāb) pastoral nomads or semi-nomads of
the Arabian Peninsula. Book see Qurʾan Bishr ibn Abī Khāzim al-Asadī
(d. after 575ad), pre-Islamic poet of the Asad ibn Khuzaymah tribe,
predecessor of the Umayyad poet Farazdaq. Bishr's poems were
collectedbytheanthologistsAṣmaʿīandIbnal-Sikkīt,andthephilologistAbūʿUbay-
dah wrote a commentary. Bishr ibn Marwān (d. 74/693), son of the Umayyad
caliph Marwān I and half-brother of the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd al-Malik,
under whom he served as governor of Iraq. Burak ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Tamīmī
(d. 40/661), sometimes called Ḥajjāj, from the Ṣur- aymclanof
Tamīm,firsttouttertheKharijiteslogan,⟨NorulesaveGod's!⟩(lāḥukma illā
li-llāh). Burak was one of three Kharijites who conspired to assassinate
ʿAlī, Muʿāwiyah, and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣin the same night. He undertook to
kill Muʿāwiyah but was captured and executed. Burj ibn Musʾhir al-Ṭāʾī
(fl. 1st/7th c.), identified by Raḍī as a Kharijite who called out in
ʿAlī's hearing their slogan, ⟨No rule save God's!⟩(§1.182). The
commentators identify him with the drunkard pagan poet b. 595ad who
migrated to Syria and con- verted to Christianity (See further: Ḥ10:130;
B 597). Busr ibn Abī Arṭāt (d. 70/689), of the ʿĀmir ibn Luʾayy tribe,
one of Muʿāwiyah's particularly brutal commanders, who fought with him
at Ṣiffīn. Earlier, Busr took part in the Muslim conquest of Syria and
probably of Egypt under ʿAmr ibn al- ʿĀṣ. Muʿāwiyah sent Busr in 37/658
to attack Medina, Mecca, and Yemen, where he killed or forced out ʿAlī's
commanders and terrorized the locals. (See further: Ḥ 1:340.) Byzantium
(Ar. Rūm) refers to the eastern half of the Roman empire, with its capi-
tal in Constantinople, which survived for a thousand years after the
western Roman empire crumbled. Constantinople was conquered in 1453ad by
the Ottoman Turks, who named it Istanbul. Cain and Abel (Ar. Qābīl and
Hābīl) two sons of the Prophet Adam. Camel (Ar. Jamal) name of a battle
fought outside Basra in Jumādā ii 36/ Novem- ber--December 656 between
the Caliph ʿAlī on one side, and Muḥammad's widow ʿĀʾishah bint Abī Bakr
and two Quraysh Emigrants, Ṭalḥah ibn ʿUbaydallāh and al- al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 836 glossary of names,
places, and terms Zubayr ibn al-ʿAwwām, on the other. The battle is
named for the camel that ʿĀʾishah rode onto the battlefield and is a
metaphor for the rider herself. The rebel leaders
andtheirBasransupportersarereferredtointhesourcesas"associatesof
theCamel" (aṣḥāb al-Jamal). colocynth (Ar. ḥanẓal) bitter desert plant
used for medicinal purposes. Swallowing or peeling colocynth was a
metaphor in early Arabic for bitter grief. Commander of the Faithful
(Ar. Amīr al-Muʾminīn) caliphal title in Islam, according to the Shiʿa
associated primarily with ʿAlī. The title was also used by the caliph-
imams of the Fatimid dynasty. Companions of the Prophet (Ar. aṣḥāb and
ṣaḥābah, sing. m. ṣaḥābī, f. ṣaḥābiyyah) individuals who had sustained
personal contact with Muḥammad and are revered for their sincere service
to Islam in its nascent stage. Key figures in the early history of
Islam, Muḥammad's Companions are also the first transmitters of his
statements and deeds. Confederates (Ar. Aḥzāb) name of a battle in 5/627
fought by the Meccan Quraysh, joined by several other tribes, to form a
force of 10,000 men with 600 cavalry against the Muslims. Muḥammad
foiled their attempt to storm Medina by digging a protec- tive trench,
and the battle is also known as the Battle of the Trench (al-Khandaq).
Unable to enter, the confederates besieged Medina, but their confederacy
broke up after a fortnight, and the siege was abandoned. Its failure
strengthened Muḥam- mad's position. ʿAlī played a major role by slaying
the enemy champion ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Wadd in single combat. covenant, people
with see protected peoples al-Ḍaḥḥāk ibn Qays al-Fihrī (d. 64/684),
Muʿāwiyah's commander, active at the Bat- tle of Ṣiffīn and in its
aftermath. (See further: Ḥ2:113--117; B 225). Dajjāl the Antichrist.
According to Islamic tradition, he is an evil man who will appear at the
end of time, signaling the approach of judgment day. Damascus (Ar.
Dimashq, Dimashq al-Shām, or Shām) largest city in Syria, earlier under
Byzantine rule, conquered by the Muslims in 14/635. Muʿāwiyah was gover-
norof Damascusduringthereignsof ʿUmarandʿUthmān,andafterʿUthmān'sdeath
he fought ʿAlī. After ʿAlī's death in 40/661, Muʿāwiyah became caliph
and Damascus remainedtheUmayyadseatof governmentof
theMuslimempireuntiltheAbbasids defeated them in 132/750 and set up
their capital in Baghdad. Dārī attributive of Dārīn, an island near
Qaṭīf, on the east coast of present-day Saudi Arabia. In pre-Islamic and
early Islamic times, Dārīn was the main port of Bahrain, through which
musk was imported from India, which is why Dārī musk is famous. (See
further: B 549; Ḥ9:268.) David (Ar. Dāʾūd) (fl. 10th c. bc), the
biblical King David, a prophet in the Islamic tra- dition, mentioned in
the Qurʾan as someone granted prophecy, kingship, wisdom, and justice,
as well as being the recipient of the Psalms. Muḥammad's hadith and
ʿAlī's orations emphasize David's fervent prayer and fasting. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 837 Dhakwān (fl. 1st/7th c.), an individual who is
said to have memorized and narrated ʿAlī's words to Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī
(§1.128).There is some confusion about his iden- tity: Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
identifies him as a freedman of ʿAlī's sister Umm Hānī bint Abī
Ṭālib(Ḥ8:253).Moreoften,thesourcesnameUmmHānī'sfreedmanasBādhām(full
name: Abū ṢāliḥBādhām), adding that he narrated hadith. Elsewhere, they
speak of afreedmanof
Muḥammad'swifeJuwayriyah,namedDhakwān(fullname:AbūṢāliḥ al-Sammān
Dhakwān ibn ʿAbdallāh), who likewise narrated hadith. Yet elsewhere,
they speak of another Dhakwān, freedman of the Hāshim clan or of
al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī. Dhiʿlib al-Yamānī (fl. 1st/7th c.), individual from
Yemen who asked ʿAlī to describe God (§1.177), identified by the sources
as among the leaders and narrators of the Shiʿa. (See further: Ḥ13:18; B
680.) Dhū Qār caravan stop east of Kufa in the direction of Wāsiṭ, where
ʿAlī camped enroute to Basra, where he fought the Battle of the Camel.
Dhū Qār was also the site of a major early 7th-century ad battle between
the Arabs and the Sasanian Per- sians. (See further: Ḥ2:187--188.) Dhū
al-Rummah, Abū al-Ḥārith Ghaylān ibn ʿUqbah (d. 117/735), important
Bedou- in poet of the Umayyad era. Dhū al-Shahādatayn
(The-Twice-Martyred) see Khuzaymah ibn al-Thābit Dhū al-Thudayyah (The
Man with the Breast) (d. 38/658), Kharijite killed at Nah- rawān, called
thus because of a lump of flesh on his shoulder. Some sources identify
Dhū al-Thudayyah as Ḥurqūṣibn Zuhayr al-Saʿdī, a leader of the Bajīlah
tribe, who was killed fighting ʿAlī at Nahrawān. Ḥurqūṣis in turn
identified as ʿAmr Dhū al-
Khuwayṣirahal-Tamīmī,whowasinsolenttoMuḥammadregardingthedistribution of
war spoils. (See further: Ḥ13:183--184; B 771--772; F 364--365.) Ḍīrār
ibn Ḍamrah al-Ḍibābī (d. after 40/661), of the clan of Fihr from the
Quraysh tribe, a loyal associate of ʿAlī, reported in several early
sources to have spoken elo- quently of his late master's virtues at the
court of ʿAlī's archenemy, Muʿāwiyah. (See further: Ḥ18:225--226, R
3:294--295). duʿāʾ supplication. Durayd ibn al-Ṣimmah (d. 8/630), of the
Hawāzin tribe, famous poet and warrior who lived mostly in the
pre-Islamic period. Durayd was reportedly killed at the age of one
hundred, fighting against Muḥammad in the Battle of Ḥunayn. Dūmat
al-Jandal site of the post-Ṣiffīn arbitration in 37/658, with Abū Mūsā
al- Ashʿarī and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣrepresenting ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah
respectively. It was an oasis on the route between Medina and Damascus
in early Islamic times, and part of Syria. It is located today in the
Jawf province of Saudi Arabia, southwest of the provincial capital,
Sakākah. Egypt (Ar. Miṣr) refers in the early Islamic period both to the
province and to its capi- tal city, Fusṭāṭ. Egypt was conquered by the
Muslims in 22/643, under the command al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 838
glossary of names, places, and terms of ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ. At the onset of
ʿAlī's caliphate, in 35/656, the province pledged allegiance to him, but
following the arbitration in 37/658, ʿAmr, now Muʿāwiyah's chief advisor
and governor-designate, killed ʿAlī's governor, Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr,
and took over Egypt. Emigrants (Ar. Muhājirūn) those who migrated with
Muḥammad from Mecca to Medina, and those who migrated from elsewhere to
be with him. Along with the Allies, they are revered by later Muslims
for their sincere service to Islam in its diffi- cult early years and
are considered among Muḥammad's closest Companions. Euphrates (Ar.
Furāt) together with the Tigris, one of the two defining rivers of
Mesopotamia.Originating inTurkey,itflowsthroughSyriaandIraqtojoin
theTigris and empties into the Arabian/Persian Gulf. The major cities of
early Islamic Iraq--- Kufa, Basra, and later Baghdad---were all built
along or near the Euphrates. Fadak village near Khaybar, with abundant
dates and grain, a three-dayjourney from Medina in early Islamic times.
After Muḥammad's death, his daughter Fāṭimah claimed ownership of Fadak
as her inherited right, a right denied her by Abū Bakr. The Umayyad
caliph ʿUmar ii (r. 99--101/717--720) returned Fadak to Fāṭimah's heirs.
faith-leavers (Ar. māriqūn) appellation applied to the Kharijites. (See
further: Ḥ 13:183--184; B 771--772; F 364--365.) Family of the Prophet
see Ahl al-bayt Farazdaq, Abū Firās Hammām ibn Ghālib (d. 114/732),
Umayyad-era poet who com- posed eulogies for the Umayyad caliphs, also
famous for a lengthy poem in praise of the Shiʿi Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn.
When Farazdaq was young, his father reportedly brought him to Iraq to
visit ʿAlī. Fars (Ar. al-Fāris) Arabicized form of Pārs, English Persia,
province in southwestern Iran, with Shiraz as its main city. Earlier
center of the Achaemenid and Sasanian dynasties, the Muslims conquered
Fars in 28/648, and it became a major province of the Islamic empire.
Fāṭimah al-Zahrāʾ bint Muḥammad (d. 11/632), ʿAlī's wife and Muḥammad's
youn- gest daughter, about whom he said, ⟨May my life be ransom for
yours, Fāṭimah, you are the queen of the women of paradise.⟩She died
young, just two months after her father. Fāṭimah had four children with
ʿAlī: Ḥasan, Ḥusayn, Zaynab, and Umm Kulthūm, all of whom played key
roles in the political and religious life of early Islam. fifth (Ar.
khums) one-fifth share mandated by the Qurʾan of the spoils of war and
other specified forms of income, set aside for the Prophet and other
designated ben- eficiaries (Qurʾan, Anfāl 8:41). Firās ibn Ghanam tribe
descended from Kinānah and Muḍar, residing in the area north of Mecca in
Wādī Qadīd, famous for its members' courage and loyalty. (See further: R
1:203; B 211.) al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 839 Followers-in-Virtue (Ar. al-tābiʿūna bi-iḥsān) or
Successors, appellation applied to the second generation of Muslims,
directly following Muḥammad's Companions. Freedmen (Ar. ṭulaqāʾ)
derogatory term referring to those members of the Quraysh, including
Muʿāwiyah's father, Abū Sufyān, who remained Muḥammad's committed
enemies until forced to capitulate upon his conquest of Mecca. On that
day, instead of forcing them into captivity as per the standard
practice, Muḥammad pardoned them, saying, "You are freedmen." Fusṭāṭ
originally a military encampment on the Nile alongside the
Byzantinefortress of Babylon, built in the wake of the Muslim conquest
of Egypt in 22/643, and thence capital of the province of Egypt. It was
replaced in 358/969 as the capital by the conquering Fatimids' newly
built city of Cairo. Gabriel (Ar. Jibrīl) archangel in Islamic
tradition, who served as God's messenger in bringing revelation to the
prophets, including Muḥammad. Ghadīr Khumm (Pool of Khumm) oasis located
5 kilometers from Juḥfah, on the caravan route between Mecca and Medina,
where Muḥammad delivered an impor- tant oration to a large gathering of
Muslims following his farewell pilgrimage, and
declared,"ForwhomsoeverIamMawlā,ʿAlīishenceforthhisMawlā."TheShiʿainter-
pret the word Mawlā here to mean "master" and deem it proof of
Muḥammad's des- ignation of ʿAlī as his successor. Sunnis interpret the
word to mean "kinsman," and state that the Prophet said what he said to
protect ʿAlī from those who wished him harm, but the words did not
signify an appointment of succession. Ghadīr Khumm is also used to
denote the day and the event. Ghālib ibn Ṣaʿṣaʿah (d. ca. 40/666),
Tamīmī chieftain famed for his generosity, father of the renowned
Umayyad-era poet Farazdaq. A contemporary of Muḥammad, Ghālib is also
said to have visited ʿAlī in Iraq and introduced Farazdaq to him; ʿAlī
advised Ghālib to teach his son the Qurʾan. (See further: Ḥ19:96; R
3:441--442.) Ghāmidī see Sufyān ibn ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī gharīb rare words in
Muḥammad's hadith, ʿAlī's sayings, and elsewhere in the Arabic literary
corpus, that medieval critics deemed in need of explication. A section
of 9 wisdom sayings in the present volume contains gharīb words. Golden
Calf (Ar. ʿijl) calf-shaped idol worshipped by the Israelites under the
direc- tion of the Samaritan (Ar. Sāmirī), while Moses was on the
mountain communing with God. Ḥāḍirīn place in northern Syria where ʿAlī
reportedly wrote a testament for his son Ḥasan on the way back from
Ṣiffīn. Ḥāḍirīn does not appear to be mentioned any- where in the
sources; perhaps it is a mistranscription for some form of ḥāḍir, mean-
ing urban space or town. (See further: Ḥ16:52.) hadith (Ar. ḥadīth)
often translated as Traditions, these are reports of Muḥammad's words,
deeds, and gestures.The hadith hold a special position of authority and
guid- ance for Muslims, complementing the Qurʾan. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 840
glossary of names, places, and terms Hajar town near Bahrain proverbial
for its dates. (See further: Ḥ15:188; B 819; F 372.) hajj (Ar. ḥajj)
pilgrimage to the Kaʿbah in Mecca mandated once in a lifetime for every
Muslim, combining rituals performed by Abraham and Muḥammad. The hajj
isperformedinthemonthnamedforit,Dhūal-Ḥijjah,thefinalmonthintheIslamic
lunar calendar. al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf al-Thaqafī (d. 95/714), Umayyad
governor of Iraq famed for his eloquence and notorious for his harsh
rule. ḤakīmibnJabalahal-ʿAbdī (d.35/656),earlyMuslim,contemporaryof
Muḥammad, known for his piety and valor. Ḥakīm was killed combating the
forces of Ṭalḥah and Zubayr, who were attempting to remove ʿAlī's
governor in Basra in the lead-up to the Battle of the Camel. (See
further: Ḥ9:110.) Ḥamal ibn Badr (d. late 6th c. ad), pre-Islamic
warrior from the clan of Fazārah of the Dhubyān tribe, who was killed in
the Battle of Dāḥis, a decades-long conflict between the tribes of
Dhubyān and ʿAbs, during the latter half of the 6th century ad. (See
further: F 374; R 3:82; B 824.) Ḥamal ibn Saʿd al-ʿAshīrah (fl. 6th
c. ad), pre-Islamic warrior from the clan of Saʿd al-ʿAshīrah of the
Madhḥij tribe. Hammām (d. ca. 36/656), devout associate of ʿAlī who
reportedly passed away upon hearing ʿAlī's oration describing the truly
pious, named after him as The Oration to Hammām (§1.191). Some
commentators give his full name as Hammām ibn Shurayḥ ibn Yazīd, while
others identify him as Hammām ibn ʿUbādah ibn Khuthaym. (See further:
Ḥ10:134; B 599.) Ḥamzah ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib ibn Hāshim (d. 3/624),
known as King of Martyrs and God's Lion, paternal uncle of Muḥammad and
ʿAlī, who fought valiantly at the Bat- tle of Badr and killed several
Meccan warriors in single combat. He was slain by treachery the
following year at the Battle of Uḥud by a man who was incited by
Muʿāwiyah's mother, Hind. Muḥammad grieved deeply for Ḥamzah and recited
the funeral prayer for him 70 times, placing Ḥamzah's bier in front of
the bier of each martyr as he prayed for them one by one. Ḥanẓalah ibn
Abī Sufyān (d. 2/624), Muʿāwiyah's brother from the Umayyah clan of
Quraysh, killed by ʿAlī in the fighting against Muḥammad at the Battle
of Badr. (See further: B 792; R 3:31; F 369.) ḤarbibnShuraḥbīlal-Shibāmī
(d.after37/657),chieftainof theclanof Shibāmfrom the Yemeni tribe of
Hamdān, who settled in Kufa. Ḥarb was a follower of ʿAlī and fought with
him at Ṣiffīn. Ḥarb ibn Umayyah ibn ʿAbd Shams (d. ca. 607ad),
Muʿāwiyah's grandfather, from the clan of Umayyah of Quraysh, father of
Abu Sufyān and father-in-law of Abū Lahab, both fierce enemies of
Muḥammad. Ḥarb was one of the leading chieftains of Mecca in his day.
al-Ḥārith (al-Aʿwar) al-Hamdānī (d. 65/685), resident of Kufa and a
learned man, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 841 staunch supporter of ʿAlī who participated in his
battles. Ḥārith belonged to the Ḥūthclanof theHamdāntribeof
Yemen,andhisfullnameisal-ḤārithibnʿAbdallāh ibn Kaʿb al-Hamdānī. A
famous set of verses addressing him by name is attributed to ʿAlī. He
appears in several reports in the present volume. (See further:
Ḥ17:42--43.) al-Ḥārith ibn Ḥawṭal-Laythī (or Khuṭ, or less likely Ḥawt
or Ḥūt) (d. after 36/656), a man who challenged ʿAlī after the Battle of
the Camel over the rightfulness of fight- ing ʿĀʾishah, Ṭalḥah, and
Zubayr. Nothing else is found in the sources about Ḥārith, except
discussions regarding the spelling of his father's name, an additional
indica- tion that he was not well known. Harlot see Nābighah Ḥarūriyyah
(sing. Ḥarūrī) twelve thousand men who gathered in Ḥarūrāʾ near Kufa in
37/657 to protest ʿAlī's decision to accept arbitration in his dispute
with Muʿāwi- yah over the caliphate. The Ḥarūriyyah are considered the
first Kharijites. (See fur- ther: B 958.). al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī
(d. 49/669), eldest son of ʿAlī and Fāṭimah, grandson of Muḥam- mad, and
Shiʿa Imam after his father. The Prophet said, ⟨Ḥasan and Ḥusayn are the
leaders of the youth of paradise.⟩After ʿAlī's death in 40/661, Ḥasan
received the pledge of the caliphate in Kufa. He abdicated six months
later and returned to Med- ina, where he was reportedly poisoned on
Muʿāwiyah's orders ten years later. (See further: Ḥ16:9--52.) Hāshim
Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's clan within Quraysh, named after their
great-grand- father, Hāshim ibn ʿAbd Manāf. Hāshim ibn ʿAbd Manāf
(d. ca. 497ad), Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's paternal great- grandfather and
custodian of the sanctuary in Mecca. Hāshim used to travel to Syria to
trade and he married and set up a second home in Gaza. He died and is
buried there in a shrine within the mosque complex named for him. Hāshim
ibn ʿUtbah al-Mirqāl (d. 37/656), tribal chieftain of Kufa, nephew of
Mu- ḥammad's Companion Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ, and one of ʿAlī's staunch
supporters. Hāshim was killed at the Battle of Ṣiffīn. (See further:
Ḥ6:55--56.) Ḥassān (or Ashras) ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī al-Balawī
(d. 38/658), ʿAlī's governor in Anbar, who was killed by a cavalry troop
led by Muʿāwiyah's commander, Sufyān ibn ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī. (See further:
R 1:214--215; B 215--216; Ḥ2:75--76, 85--90.) Ḥassān ibn Thābit
al-Anṣārī (d. ca. 40/659 or 50/669 or 54/673), of the Khazraj tribe of
Medina, the best-known of several poets associated with the rise of
Islam. Ḥassān was among the handful of prominent Companions who refused
to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī. Ḥātim al-Ṭāʾī (fl. second half of 6th
century ad), pre-Islamic poet of the tribe of Ṭayy, proverbial for his
generosity. Hawāzin north Arabian tribal federation, including the
tribes of Thaqīf and Saʿd ibn Bakr, who fought the Muslims at the Battle
of Ḥunayn in 8/630. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 842 glossary of names,
places, and terms Ḥijāz western part of the Arabian Peninsula, where the
cities of Mecca and Medina are located. The province runs along the Red
Sea coast and is bordered to the east by the Sarāt Mountains. Hijrah
(Migration) Muḥammad's migration from Mecca to Medina in 622ad. The
Islamic calendar begins from this year, which is considered the first
"Hijri" year. ḥikmah wisdom, or wisdom saying, or aphorism. Ḥirāʾ
mountain located northeast of Mecca, where Muḥammad is said to have
spent a month every year immersed in God's worship. It is here that he
is said to have received his first Qurʾanic revelation. Hishām ibn ʿAbd
al-Malik (r. 105--125/724--743), Umayyad caliph. Hishām ibn Muḥammad ibn
al-Sāʾib al-Kalbī (d. 206/821), famous Kufan genealo- gist and scholar,
whose grandfather Sāʾib fought with ʿAlī in the Battles of the Camel and
Ṣiffīn. Ibn al-Kalbī is also the compiler of a lost book titled Khuṭab
ʿAlī (Orations of ʿAlī). (See further: Ḥ18:66.) Hīt town in northern
Iraq on the Euphrates River toward Syria, site of a raid by Muʿāwiyah's
commander, Sufyān ibn ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī, in 39/659. (See further F 392;
R:219.) House of God see Kaʿbah Ḥudaybiyyah (or Ḥudaybiyah) village just
outside Mecca, site of a peace treaty con- cluded in 6/628 between
Muḥammad and the Quraysh. Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī (d. 52/672), Kufan chieftain of
the Kindah tribe of Yemen, staunch sup- porter of ʿAlī who fought with
him at the Battle of the Camel and at Ṣiffīn. During Muʿāwiyah's
caliphate, Ḥujr challenged the Umayyads' cursing of ʿAlī, and he, along
with several other Shiʿis, was tortured and beheaded by Muʿāwiyah's
governor Ziyād. Ḥulwān ancient town situated near the entrance to the
Paytak pass through the Zagros range, identified with the present-day
village of Sar-i Pul, 33 kilometers east of Qaṣr-i Shīrīn, in the
Kermanshah province of Iran. Ḥulwān was a town of note in early Islamic
times, and a garrison was stationed there during ʿAlī's caliphate.
Ḥunayn site of the Battle of Ḥunayn, fought between the Muslims and the
Hawāzin tribal confederation in 8/630, following the conquest of Mecca,
which ended in a decisive victory for the Muslims. Ḥunayn is a deep
valley situated a day's journey from Mecca on the road to Ṭāʾif. Ḥurayth
(or Ḥarīth) Kharijite leader who fled from Iraq to Ramhormoz, against
whom ʿAlī sent a battalion under Maʿqil ibn Qays in 38/658. (See
further: F 369--370.) al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī (d. 61/680), second son of ʿAlī
and Fāṭimah, grandson of Muḥam- mad, and Shiʿa Imam after his older
brother, Ḥasan. Muḥammad said, ⟨Ḥasan and Ḥusayn are the leaders of the
youth of paradise.⟩Ḥusayn was killed by the Umayyads with his family and
a handful of supporters at Karbala and is famous in Shiʿi lore as King
of Martyrs (sayyid al-shuhadāʾ). al-Ḥuṣayn (or al-Ḥuḍayn) ibn al-Mundhir
al-Raqāshī, Abū Sāsān (d. ca. 100/718), al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 843 notable and poet of Basra, among the
leading members of the second generation of Muslims, a follower of ʿAlī,
who carried the banner of Rabīʿah at Ṣiffīn. Later one of the associates
of Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq. Iblīs (Eng. Lucifer), archdevil condemned in the
Qurʾan. Originally a jinni or angel, he refused to bow down before Adam
when God commanded him and was expelled from heaven for his
disobedience. He vowed to lead the sons of Adam astray in every age. Ibn
al-ʿAbbās see ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, ʿIzz al-Dīn ʿAbd
al-Ḥamīd ibn Hibatallāh (d. ca. 656/1258), Sunni- Muʿtazilī theologian,
"tafḍīlī" (one who gave precedence to ʿAlī over the three ear- lier
Sunni caliphs), and a poet, historian, and literary theorist, best known
for his twenty-volume commentary on Nahj al-Balāghah. An official in the
Abbasid state, he held various administrative posts in the capital,
Baghdad, just before the Mongol sack. Ibn Abī Rāfiʿ see ʿUbaydallāh ibn
Abī Rāfiʿ Ibn al-Aʿrābī (d. 231/846), prominent philologist of the Kufan
school. Ibn Funduq al-Bayhaqī (d. 565/1170), early Sunni commentator of
Nahj al-Balāghah from Khurasan, who relied on the lost, possibly the
first, Nahj al-Balāghah commen- tary, by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Wabrī
(fl. early 6th/12th c.), from Khwārazm. Ibn Funduq is the author of more
than 70 works in Arabic and Persian on history and an encyclopedic range
of subjects. Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī see ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Ḥaḍramī Ibn
al-Ḥanafiyyah see Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib Ibn Ḥunayf see ʿUthmān
ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī Ibn al-Kawwāʾ (d. after 44/664), whose given name
was ʿAbdallāh ibn Awfah al- Yashkurī, a Kharijite leader who fought
against ʿAlī at Nahrawān and escaped. He visited Muʿāwiyah in 44/664.
Ibn al-Tayyihān Abū al-Haytham al-Anṣārī (d. 37/657), early convert to
Islam from the Medinan tribe of Aws and one of the Allies who fought for
Muḥammad in the earliest battles of Badr and Uḥud. Ibn al-Tayyihān was
killed fighting for ʿAlī at the Battle of Ṣiffīn. (See further:
Ḥ10:107--108; B 590--591.) Ibn Masʿūd see ʿAbdallāh ibn Masʿūd Ibn
Muljam (or Ibn Muljim) al-Murādī (d. 40/661), of the Kindah tribe of
Yemen, the Kharijite who assassinated ʿAlī. He was executed by ʿAlī's
son and successor, Ḥasan. Ibn Nubātah al-Saʿdī al-Khaṭīb (d. 374/985),
famous Aleppan preacher who memo- rized a large number of ʿAlī's
orations and drew on them for his own. Ibn al-Sikkīt (d. 244/858),
scholar of Arabic lexicography, poetry, and grammar, au- thor of about
twenty books. Ibn ʿUmar see ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar Ibn al-Zubayr see
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Zubayr al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 844 glossary of names,
places, and terms ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā Eid of Sacrifice, major feast day
following the hajj, on 10th Dhū al-Ḥijjah. ʿĪd al-Fiṭr Eid of
Breaking-the-Fast, major feast day following the fasting month of
Ramaḍān, on 1st Shawwāl. ʿIkrimah ibn Abī Jahl (d. 13/634 or 15/636),
from the Makhzūm clan, son of Muḥam- mad's fierce enemy and a leader of
the Quraysh in their battles against Muḥammad. ʿIkrimah fled toYemen
near the time of the Muslim conquest of Mecca in 10/632 but was later
pardoned. Abū Bakr appointed him to command Muslim expeditions in Yemen
and Syria; he was likely killed fighting the Byzantines in the Battle of
Ajnā- dayn in Palestine in 13/634. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.)
imam (Ar. imām) lit. leader, refers either to the supreme leader of the
Muslim com- munity or to an exemplary scholar or prayer-leader. In Shia
doctrine, the term denotes the Prophet Muḥammad, his legatee, ʿAlī, and
their descendants, one in each age, who inherit their role of spiritual
and temporal leadership, who are divinely guided and sole legitimate
leaders of the Muslim community. The concept is rendered as Imamate (Ar.
imāmah). ʿImrān ibn al-Ḥuṣayn al-Khuzāʿī (d. 52/672), converted to Islam
in 7/628 and settled in Basra soon after the conquest of Iraq. He was
among the handful of early Mus- lims who refused to pledge allegiance to
ʿAlī, and he actively attempted to dissuade the Iraqis from supporting
ʿAlī. ʿImrān fell ill soon thereafter and lived with chronic illness for
nearly two decades until his death. (See further: Ḥ17:132.) Imruʾ
al-Qays ibn Ḥujr al-Kindī (d. ca. 550ad), ranked by medieval
critics---and by ʿAlī---as the best pre-Islamic poet, one of the
composers of the celebrated Hanging Odes. Princely descendant of the
Kindah, Imruʾ al-Qays is often called the Wander- ing King.
Iraq(Ar.ʿIrāq)
importantprovinceintheearlyIslamicempire,conquered14--17/635-- 638. Its
major cities in ʿAlī's reign were Basra and Kufa, the seat of his
caliphate. Isaac (Ar. Isḥāq) a prophet in Islam, son of the Prophet
Abraham and ancestor of the Jews. Ishmael (Ar. Ismāʿīl) a prophet in
Islam, son of the Prophet Abraham, and ancestor of the Arabs. Muḥammad
and ʿAlī reportedly descend from his line. Iskāfī, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad
ibn ʿAbdallāh (d. 240/854), Baghdadi Muʿtazilī who lived to a great age,
and "tafḍīlī" Sunni, who maintained ʿAlī's superiority to all other
Companions of Muḥammad. Among Iskāfī's lost works is Kitāb al-Maqāmāt fī
tafḍīl ʿAlī (Book of exhortations, on ʿAlī's superiority). (See further:
Ḥ17:132--133; B 913.) Iṣṭakhr town in the Fars district of Iran, an
hour's journey north of the ancient Achaemenid capital Persepolis,
religious center of the Sasanian kingdom. The Mus- lims conquered it in
23/643 and it remained a fairly important place during the early
centuries of Islam. Jābir ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Anṣārī (d. ca. 78/697), early
Companion and one of the Allies, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 845 resident of Medina from the tribe of Khazraj. He
pledged allegiance to Muḥammad at ʿAqabah before the Emigration and
remained a staunch supporter of ʿAlī, fighting in all his battles. He
died in Madāʾin, near present-day Baghdad, in his nineties. Jābir was a
prolific narrator of Muḥammad's hadith and ʿAlī's words. Jaʿdah ibn
Hubayrah al-Makhzūmī (d. after 40/661), ʿAlī's nephew, son of his sister
Umm Hānī, a brave warrior and a learned man. Jaʿdah was close to ʿAlī
and served as his governor in Khurasan. (See further: Ḥ10:77--78; B 585;
Ḥ13:130; B 679.) Jaʿfar ibn Abī Ṭālib (d. 8/629), ʿAlī's older brother,
commander of Muḥammad's forces at the Battle of Muʾtah, killed with his
arms cut off in the battle. Muḥam- mad bestowed on him the epithets
Ṭayyār, "He-Who-Soars-in-Paradise," and Dhū al-Janāḥayn,
"He-of-the-Two-Wings." He is buried in Muʾtah, in the south of present-
day Jordan. Jaʿfaral-ṢādiqibnMuḥammadal-Bāqir,Abū ʿAbdallāh
(d.148/765),great-grandson of the Prophet's grandson Ḥusayn, recognized
by the Ismaʿili and Twelver Shiʿa as the Imam succeeding his father,
Muḥammad al-Bāqir. He spent most of his life in Medina and died there.
Known as al-Ṣādiq, The Truthful, he, like his father, is the source of
many oral reports in Shiʿi tradition. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq is also reported
to be the teacher of two eponymous founders of Sunni legal schools, Abū
Ḥanīfah and Mālik. Jāḥiẓ, ʿAmr ibn Baḥr (d. 255/868), prolific author
who wrote some 240 books and essays on diverse topics, of which 75
survive whole or in part. Among his most
famousfull-lengthbooksisthe4-volumeal-Bayānwa-l-tabyīn(Eloquenceandexpo-
sition), mentioned by Raḍī. He cites and praises ʿAlī's words frequently
in his books, and a compilation of ʿAlī's sayings titled Miʾat kalimah
(One Hundred Proverbs) is also attributed to him. Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh
al-Bajalī (d. after 55/675), of the Bajīlah tribe, converted to Islam
shortly before Muḥammad's death and settled in Kufa, later becoming
ʿUthmān's governor in Hamadhān. Dismissed by ʿAlī, he came to Kufa and
pledged allegiance, then served as ʿAlī's emissary to Muʿāwiyah in the
lead-up to Ṣiffīn and later as his governor in Hamadhān. According to
the sources Jarīr remained secretly pro- Umayyad. (See further:
Ḥ3:70--74.) Jāriyah ibn Qudāmah al-Saʿdī (d. before 67/686), from the
tribe of Tamīm, was a Companion of the Prophet and staunch supporter of
ʿAlī. He died in Basra. al-Jārūd al-ʿAbdī, Bishr ibn Khunays ibn
al-Muʿallā (d. 21/642), chieftain of ʿAbd al- Qays who came with a
delegation from his tribe to Muḥammad in Medina ca. 9/630 and converted
to Islam. Jārūd dissuaded the ʿAbd al-Qays from apostatizing after
Muḥammad's death. He was killed fighting with the Muslims during their
conquest of Persia. (See further: Ḥ18:55--57.) Jesus (Ar. ʿĪsā) a
prophet in Islam. In the Qurʾan, he is called the Son of Mary, the
Messiah (masīḥ), the Word (kalimah), and the Spirit (rūḥ). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 846 glossary of names,
places, and terms jihad (Ar. jihād) righteous struggle against the
forces of evil. Jihad can refer equally to battle with outside enemies
or combat with one's own base instincts. jinn category of beings created
from fire, non-corporeal spirits, believed to possess powers for evil
and good. Jisr al-Nahrawān (The Bridge of Nahrawān) see Nahrawān Jumaḥ
clan of the Quraysh. Jumayḥibn al-Sharīd al-Taghlibī (d. ca. 570ad),
pre-Islamic warrior and poet cited as a source of proverbial verses.
Jumayḥis sometimes said to be the sobriquet of Munqidh ibn
al-Ṭammāḥal-Asadī. Kaʿbah cuboid in Mecca, the holiest sanctuary of
Islam, reportedly built by the Prophet Abraham, also called The House of
God (Bayt Allāh). Muslim worship- pers throughout the world face the
Kaʿbah in their daily prayer, and hundreds of thousands of pilgrims
circumambulate it every year during the hajj and ʿumrah pil- grimages.
Kalb Arabian lineage group of the Quḍāʿah tribal federation.
Predominantly camel- breeding pastoralists, the Kalb comprised powerful
clans in the deserts between Syria and Iraq in pre-Islamic times and
later were allies of the Umayyads. Khabbāb ibn al-Aratt (d. 37/63), one
of the earliest converts to Islam and an eminent Companion of Muḥammad.
As a freed slave of Nabataean origin, he suffered cruel torture at the
hands of the Quraysh in Mecca because of his conversion. A strong
supporter of ʿAlī, he died in Kufa soon after ʿAlī left for Ṣiffīn. (See
further: Ḥ18:171-- 172; B 947.) KhadījahbintKhuwaylid
(d.619ad),Muḥammad'sfirstwife,thefirstMuslim,moth- er of all but one
(Ibrāhīm, son of Māriyah the Copt) of Muḥammad's children: daughters
Fāṭimah, Zaynab, Ruqayyah, and Umm Kulthūm, and two sons, Qāsim and
ʿAbdallāh, both of whom died in infancy. Khālid ibn al-Walīd
(d. 21/642), from the Makhzūm clan of Meccan Quraysh, lauded by Sunnis
for his prominent role as military commander in the conquests of Iraq
and Syria and condemned by the Shiʿis for his antagonism toward ʿAlī.
Kharijites(Ar.Khawārij,sing.Khārijī,Eng.Seceders)
stronglymilitaristgroupof Mus- lims who seceded from ʿAlī's following
subsequent to the post-Ṣiffīn arbitration.
Withtheanti-ʿAlīdictum,⟨NorulesaveGod's!⟩(lāḥukmaillāli-llāh),theykilledany
who disagreed. ʿAlī fought and defeated them at the Battle of Nahrawān
in 38/658. Most Kharijite factions eventually died out; they survive
today as the milder Ibāḍī denomination in Oman and North Africa. (See
further: Ḥ4:132--278.) Khaybar oasis 150 kilometers north of Medina,
famous for its abundance of date palms, with a large Jewish population
in pre-Islamic times. Khaybar was the site of a major battle between
Muḥammad and the Jews in 7/628. ʿAlī played a major role in the Muslim
victory when he slew the Jewish champion Marḥab in single combat.
al-Khirrīt ibn Rāshid al-Nājī (d. 38/658), chieftain of the Nājiyah
tribe, which had al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 847 converted to Islam and who, under his leadership,
deserted from ʿAlī's army after the post-Ṣiffīn arbitration and reverted
to Christianity. ʿAlī sent troops under Maʿqil ibn Qays al-Riyāḥī to
fight them, and Khirrīt was killed in the ensuing battle. (See further:
Ḥ3:120--151.) Khurasan(Ar.Khurāsān)
regioncomprisingpresent-daynortheasternIran,Afghani- stan,andpartsof
CentralAsia.InSasaniantimes,Khurasanwasoneof thefourgreat provincial
governorates. The Muslims conquered it ca. 30/651, and it remained one
of the richest provinces of the early Islamic period. Khushnūshak
Persian merchant clan, which ʿAlī encountered in Anbar, in northern
Iraq, in 36/656, on the march toward the Battle of Ṣiffīn. khuṭbah
(oration) official discourse serving various religious, political,
legislative, military, and other purposes, and containing diverse themes
of piety, policy, exhor- tation to battle, and law. In modern usage, the
term almost exclusively denotes the ritual Friday sermon. Khuzaymah ibn
Thābit al-Anṣārī (d. 37/657), famous as Dhū al-Shahādatayn, The
Twice-Martyred, from Muḥammad's hadith stating that his martyrdom had a
two- fold worth. Dhū al-Shahādatayn was an early convert to Islam from
the Medinan tribe of Aws and one of the Allies who fought for Muḥammad
at Badr and Uḥud. He was killed fighting for ʿAlī at the Battle of
Ṣiffīn. (See further: Ḥ10:107--108; B 591; n. 3 of R 2:192.) Kirman (or
Kerman, Ar. Kirmān) province in the southwest of present-day Iran, adja-
cent to the province of Fars, conquered by the Muslims in ca. 17/638.
kitab letter or book. The Book (Ar. Kitāb) is the Qurʾan. Kufa
garrisoncityfoundedin17/638,duringtheMuslimconquestsalongtheEuphra- tes,
on the alluvial plains of Iraq. The city served as ʿAlī's capital and
remained a center for Shiʿi Islam for centuries afterward. Today it is a
suburb of Najaf, the city that houses ʿAlī's shrine, and a place of
pilgrimage. Kulayb al-Jarmī (d. after 61/680), son of Shihāb ibn
al-Majnūn, a Basran (also iden- tified as Kufan, perhaps having moved
there during ʿAlī's caliphate) who is said to have been an associate of
ʿAlī, his sons Ḥasan and Ḥusayn, and his grandson ʿAlī Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn.
Kumayl ibn Ziyād al-Nakhaʿī (d. 82/701), close companion of ʿAlī who
fought at Ṣif- fīn and served as governor of Hīt, a frontier town in the
north of Iraq. He narrated ʿAlī's words and the famous Kumayl's Prayer
is one he is said to have learned from ʿAlī. Kumayl, alongside other
staunch and vocal supporters of ʿAlī, was executed by the Umayyad
governor Ḥajjāj. (See further: Ḥ17:149--150.) Laylā bint Masʿūd ibn
Khālid al-Nahshaliyyah (d. ca. 61/681), ʿAlī's wife whom he married
during the early part of his caliphate in Basra. She bore him three
sons: two died fighting for Ḥusayn in Karbala. In some reports, Laylā
also accompanied Ḥusayn to Karbala. She died soon thereafter in Medina.
(See further: F 271--272.) al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 848 glossary of names,
places, and terms Lucifer see Iblīs Madāʾin lit. The Cities, metropolis
of several adjacent cities on the Tigris River, 32 kilometers southeast
of Abbasid Baghdad; one of them, Ctesiphon, was the Sasa- nian capital.
At the time of the Muslim conquest in 16/637, Ctesiphon was the
residence of the Jewish Exilarch and the Nestorian Catholicos. It was
home to a population of around 130,000, with diverse faiths including
Jews, Christians, and Zoroastrians, and varied ethnicities, including
Aramaeans, Greeks, Persians, and Syrians. Madhḥij large tribal group in
the southern Arabian Peninsula and Yemen. Madhḥij played an important
role in the early Muslim conquests, especially of Egypt. They fought
with ʿAlī at Ṣiffīn, under the leadership of Mālik al-Ashtar. Mahdī
lit.TheRightlyGuidedOne,theMessiahwhowillcomeattheendof timeand
institute an era of justice and peace. The Mahdī is a descendant of
Muḥammad. Makhzūm prominent clan of Quraysh. (See further: B 964.) Mālik
angel who guards the gates of hell. Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar
al-Nakhaʿī (d. ca. 37/658), tribal chieftain of the Mad- hḥij tribe of
Kufa, one of the foremost warriors of the early Muslim conquests and one
of ʿAlī's strongest supporters. ʿAlī sent Ashtar as governor to Egypt,
where he was reportedly poisoned at Muʿāwiyah's behest. Earlier, he had
been among the group who called for ʿUthmān's resignation. (See further:
Ḥ15:98--102; B 888.) Maʾmūn (r. 198--218/813--833), Abbasid caliph.
Maʿqil ibn Qays al-Riyāḥī (d. 43/663), chieftain of theTamīm tribe of
Kufa, loyal sup- porter of ʿAlī. Maʿqil commanded battalions at the
Battle of the Camel and Ṣiffīn and led troops against renegade groups
during ʿAlī's caliphate. Later, he was killed fight- ing the Kharijites.
(See further: Ḥ3:120--151, 15:92; B 794; F 369--370.) Maʾrib (or Mārib)
site of a great dam and capital of the Sabaean realm in south- west
Arabia, ruled in classical antiquity by the legendary Bilqīs, Queen of
Sheba (Sabaʾ, or Sabā), whose story is recounted together with the story
of Solomon in the Qurʾan (Q Naml 27:20--44). The Qurʾan also speaks of a
devastating flood that submerged the gardens of Sheba and brought
drought (Q Sabaʾ 34:15--17). Present- day Maʾrib is the main town of the
district of the same name, 135 kilometers east of Sanaa. māriqūn see
faith-leavers Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam (r. 64--65/684--685), first caliph of
the Marwānid branch of the Umayyads, earlier exiled along with his
father from Medina by Muḥammad. Marwān returned to become a key
supporter of his cousin ʿUthmān. He fought againstʿAlīintheBattleof
theCamelbutreluctantlypledgedallegiancetohimwhen defeated. (See further:
Ḥ6:148--165.) Mary (Ar. Maryam) holy woman in Islam, mother of the
Prophet Jesus. An entire chapter of the Qurʾan is named for her, which
relates there and elsewhere the story al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 849 of her upbringing by Zachariah, her
receiving food directly from God, her miracu- lous conception and birth
of Jesus. Masʿadah ibn Ṣadaqah al-ʿAbdī (fl. 2nd/8th c.), one of the
associates of the Shiʿi ImamsMuḥammadal-Bāqir andJaʿfaral-Ṣādiq,who
narratedtheir words.Masʿadah is the author of a lost book titled Khuṭab
Amīr al-Muʾminīn (Orations of the Com- mander of the Faithful). Mashrafī
sword an excellent type of blade, so called in relation to Mashārif, a
town in Yemen, or to certain towns called the Mashārif of Syria.
Maṣqalah ibn Hubayrah al-Shaybānī (d. 50/670), of the Bakr tribe, ʿAlī's
governor in Ardashīr-khurrah. Maṣqalah is noted for purchasing the
freedom of the Nājiyah war captives from ʿAlī's commander Maʿqil ibn
Qays, then fleeing to Muʿāwiyah with- out paying. After ʿAlī's death, he
remained in Muʿāwiyah's service and participated in the killing of
ʿAlī's supporter Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī. Muʿāwiyah sent Maṣqalah to conquer
Ṭabaristān, where he was killed. (See further: Ḥ3:120--151.) maysir
pre-Islamic game of chance that involved drawing arrows to determine the
divisionof aslaughteredcamel'smeat;themanwhodrewthelongestarrowwonthe
choicest part. The Qurʾan condemns the practice as Satan's handiwork (Q
Baqarah 2:219; Māʾidah 5:90--91.) Mecca (Ar. Makkah) holiest city of
Islam, birthplace of Muḥammad and ʿAlī, home to theKaʿbahandlocusof
worshipforMuslimsworldwide.Inpre-Islamictimes,Mecca was the abode of the
Quraysh tribe and a site of pilgrimage. Muḥammad spent his youth and the
first thirteen years of his mission there. Mecca is also known as Umm
al-Qurā (Mother of all Cities), Baṭḥāʾ (The Flatland), and Bakkah.
Medina (Ar. Madīnah) second holiest city of Islam, Muḥammad's home for
his final ten years, after he had migrated from Mecca, and capital of
the Islamic polity during the first three caliphates. It is located 160
kilometers from the Red Sea and 350 kilo- meters north of Mecca, in the
Ḥijāz province of present-day Saudi Arabia. Medina is short for Madīnat
al-Nabī, City of the Prophet. It is also known as Ṭaybah (The Pure City)
and Dār al-Hijrah (Home of Migration). In pre-Islamic times, it was a
flourish- ing and fertile settlement named Yathrib, populated by the
pagan tribes of Aws and Khazraj, and the Jewish tribes of Naḍīr,
Qaynuqāʿ, and Qurayẓah, who collectively invited Muḥammad to settle
there as its chief. Messiah (Ar. Masīḥ) an epithet of Jesus, a prophet
in Islam. Michael (Ar. Mīkāʾīl) an archangel of Islamic tradition,
mentioned in the Qurʾan and paired with Gabriel. Migration see Hijrah
Mīkāʾīl see Michael. Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym al-Azdī (d. 65/684), embraced
Islam, along with his tribal del- egation, at Muḥammad's hands.
Afterward, he fought at the Battle of Qādisiyyah in Iraq and settled in
Kufa. Mikhnaf was a strong supporter of ʿAlī. He commanded the al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 850 glossary of names,
places, and terms Azdī battalion in ʿAlī's battles and served as ʿAlī's
governor in Isfahan. Later, after ʿAlī's son Ḥusayn was martyred at
Karbala, Mikhnaf joined the Tawwābūn (Peni-
tents),whosoughtrevengeforḤusayn'sdeath,andwaskilledintheensuingBattleof
ʿAyn al-Wardah. Mikhnaf's grandson, the important historian Abū Mikhnaf
Lūṭibn Yaḥyā (d. 157/774), relates much of his material on ʿAlī and
Ḥusayn from his grand- father. al-Miqdād ibn ʿAmr al-Baḥrāʾī
(d. 33/653), also known as al-Miqdād ibn al-Aswad, staunch supporter of
ʿAlī, Companion of Muḥammad, and one of the first Muslims. Earlier,
after an altercation in his homeland of Kindah, in Yemen, Miqdād fled to
Mecca, where he was adopted by al-Aswad ibn ʿAbd Yaghūth al-Zuhrī. He
fought in all Muḥammad's battles and was given command in several.
Later, he took part in the Muslim conquest of Syria. Moses (Ar. Mūsā)
prophet in Islam Mosul (Ar. Mawṣil) fortress city in north Iraq,
important in early Islamic times, located on the Tigris River, opposite
ancient Nineveh. After the Muslim conquest of Nineveh in 20/641, Mosul
was set up nearby as a military camp city. Muʿāwiyah ibn Abī Sufyān
(d. 60/680), major enemy of ʿAlī and the first Umay- yad caliph.
Muʿāwiyah was ʿUthmān's cousin and had served as governor of Syria under
him and earlier under ʿUmar. He refused to accept ʿAlī as caliph and
fought him, with the support of the people of Syria, at the Battle of
Ṣiffīn, in 37/657. After ʿAlī's death in 40/661, ʿAlī's son Ḥasan
concluded a peace agreement and Muʿāwiyah became caliph. He ruled from
Damascus for 20 years. (See further: Ḥ 6:334--340.) Muḍar one of the two
largest tribal federations in ancient north Arabia (the other is
Rabīʿah). The federation is named for Muḍar ibn Nizār ibn Maʿadd ibn
ʿAdnān, eponymous ancestor of Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's tribe of Quraysh.
(See further: B 772; Ḥ13:198.) al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah al-Thaqafī
(d. ca. 50/670), Meccan notorious for the lax- ness of his faith and for
his political cunning. Mughīrah served as governor of Kufa under ʿUmar,
and later again under Muʿāwiyah, at which time he openly cursed ʿAlī on
the pulpit. He had been among those who refused to pledge allegiance to
ʿAlī after ʿUthmān's death. (See further: Ḥ20:8--10.) al-Mughīrah ibn
al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq al-Thaqafī (d. 35/656), poet from the Tha- qīf
tribe, close associate of ʿUthmān (he was killed alongside him), and
keen enemy of ʿAlī. Mughīrah's brother Abū al-Ḥakam had been among the
Meccans ʿAlī had slain at the Battle of Uḥud. Mughīrah's father, Akhnas,
Muḥammad's fierce enemy, had accepted Islam reluctantly following the
conquest of Mecca; presumably, Mughīrah also converted then. (See
further: Ḥ8:301--303.) Muḥammad al-Bāqir ibn ʿAlī Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn, Abū
Jaʿfar (d. ca. 114/732), grandson of the Prophet's grandson Ḥusayn,
recognized by the Ismaʿili and Twelver Shiʿa as al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 851 the Imam after his father, Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn. He was a child when he accompanied his father and
grandfather to Karbala. Known as al-Bāqir or Bāqir al-ʿilm, "the one who
possesses full knowledge," he is the source of many oral reports in
Shiʿi tradition. He spent his life in Medina and died there.
MuḥammadibnʿAbdallāh (d.11/632),Prophetof IslamandMessengerof God(Rasūl
Allāh). Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr (d. 38/658), ʿAlī's ward and staunch
supporter. His father, the first caliph, Abū Bakr, died when he was a
child, and ʿAlī, who married his wid- owed mother, Asmāʾ bint ʿUmays,
raised him. Muḥammad fought alongside ʿAlī at the Battle of the Camel,
against his sister ʿĀʾishah. Serving for a short time as ʿAlī's governor
in Egypt, he was tortured and killed by Muʿāwiyah's commander ʿAmr ibn
al-ʿĀṣwhen ʿAmr captured Egypt after the arbitration. (See further:
Ḥ6:53--54, 16:142--143; B 861; R 1:295.) Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib
(d. 81/700), also known as Muḥammad ibn al-
ḤanafiyyahandIbnal-Ḥanafiyyah,ʿAlī'sson,Ḥasan'sandḤusayn'shalf-brother,who
was active in his father's service, especially at Ṣiffīn. In Umayyad
times, the Kufan chieftain al-Mukhtār al-Thaqafī led a major rebellion
in Iraq in Ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah's name. Muḥammad ibn Marwān (d. 101/719),
son of the Umayyad caliph Marwān I and half-brother of the Umayyad
caliph ʿAbd al-Malik, Muḥammad served as gover- nor of Armenia under
ʿAbd al-Malik and as the commander of military expedi- tions.
MuḥammadibnMaslamahal-Anṣārī (d.43/663or45/666),of theAwstribeof Med-
ina,anearlyconverttoIslamwholaterparticipatedintheconquestof Egypt.Hewas
among a handful of Companions who refused to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī
and sat out his battles. al-Mundhir ibn al-Jārūd al-ʿAbdī (d. 61/681),
recalcitrant Kufan chieftain who ini- tially fought alongside ʿAlī at
the Battle of the Camel, but later, when appointed governor of Fars,
stole from the treasury and was dismissed. In 61/681, two decades after
ʿAlī's death, when al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī sent a messenger to Mundhir asking
for help, he turned the messenger over to the Umayyad governor Ibn Ziyād
for execu- tion. As a reward, Ibn Ziyād appointed Mundhir governor of
Sind, where he died almost immediately. (See further: Ḥ17:55--57.)
Muʾtah a town two hours south of Karak, in present-day Jordan, site of a
battle between the Muslims and the Byzantines in 8/629, in which three
Muslim com- manders were killed, one following the other, including
ʿAlī's brother Jaʿfar al-Ṭayyār. Three years later, the Muslims
returned, under the command of Usāmah ibn Zayd, to defeat the
Byzantines. Muʿtazilah (sing. Muʿtazilī) rationalist school of Islamic
theology, which used the dialectics of Greek philosophy. Its subscribers
called themselves "people of unity al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 852 glossary of names,
places, and terms and justice" (ahl al-tawḥīd wa-l-ʿadl), meaning that
they were strictly non-anthro- pomorphic proponents of God's oneness and
advocates for his justice and thus of human free will. Nābighah
(fl. 1st/7th c.), "The Harlot," lit. "the woman who shows herself,"
infamous appellation of ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ's mother in pre-Islamic times.
Her given name is not mentioned in the sources. (See further: Ḥ6:283; B
335; M 1:415.) Nahāwand (or Nihāwand or Nahāvand or Nihāvand) town in
the Zagros Mountains of western Iran, 80 kilometers south of the city of
Hamadhān, site of a battle in 21/642 between the Muslims and the Persian
Sasanians, in which the Muslims won a decisive victory. Nahrawān
(present-day Sifwah) also called Jisr al-Nahrawān, a town in the lower
Diyālā region east of the Tigris River in Iraq, location of a battle
between ʿAlī and the Kharijite defectors from his Ṣiffīn army under
ʿAbdallāh ibn Wahb, on 9 Safar
38/17July658.PersuadedbyʿAlī'sspeech,overathousandKharijitefightersleftwith-
out fighting. Of the 2,800 men remaining, a handful fled during the
battle, the 400 wounded were pardoned by ʿAlī, and the rest were killed.
(See further: Ḥ2:265--283; B 245--246.) Nājiyah Christian tribe in
pre-Islamic times of contested origins (Nājiyah is their eponymous
mother), many of whom had converted to Islam. The Nājiyah tribe served
in ʿAlī's army in the Battle of Ṣiffīn, then deserted under the
leadership of al-Khirrīt ibn Rāshid and reverted to Christianity. (See
further: Ḥ3:120--151.) nākithūn see pledge-breakers Naṣībīn classical
Nasibis or Nisibis or Nesbin, Nusaybin in modern Turkey, where it is now
located, earlier in northern Iraq. An ancient, fortified, frontier city
on the Hirmās River, conquered by the Muslims in 18/639. Nawf ibn
Faḍālah al-Bikālī (fl. 1st/7th c.), member of the Bikāl clan of the
Ḥimyar tribe of Yemen, an associate of ʿAlī. (See further: B 585;
Ḥ10:76--77, 18:265--266.) Nightof Clamor (Ar.laylatal-harīr)
Thursday-Friday7--8Ṣafar37/27--28July658,the final, bloody night of the
two-month Battle of Ṣiffīn, between the forces of ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah.
(See further: B 289.) nock (Ar. fūq) notch at the end of an arrow into
which the bowstring fits, fūq also indicates a broken nock. Nukhaylah
towninIraqnearKufa,ontheroadtoSyria,whereʿAlīstoppedenrouteto Ṣiffīn. It
is said to correspond to present-day Khān Ibn Nukhaylah, located between
Karbala and Kufa. al-Nuʿmān ibn ʿAjlān al-Zuraqī (d. after 40/661), from
the Zurayq clan of the Khazraj tribe, one of the leaders of Muḥammad's
Allies in Medina, and a poet. Outspoken in supporting ʿAlī's right to
the caliphate over Abū Bakr, Nuʿmān was also one of the thirty witnesses
who testified to Muḥammad's appointment of ʿAlī at Ghadīr Khumm, when
ʿAlī called on them in Kufa. He participated in Ṣiffīn and served as
'Alī's governor in Bahrain. (See further: Ḥ16:174; B 869.) al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 853 al-Nuʿmān ibn Bashīr al-Anṣārī (d. 65/684), among
the handful of Medinans who refused to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī after
ʿUthmān's death and the only person from the Allies who became
Muʿāwiyah's staunch supporter. According to some reports, Nuʿmān brought
ʿUthmān's bloodstained shirt to Damascus, and Muʿāwiyah then
exhibiteditinthemosque.HefoughtwithMuʿāwiyahagainstʿAlīintheBattleof
Ṣif- fīn, and he undertook an expedition against ʿAyn al-Tamr on ʿAlī's
frontier in 39/659 but was forced to retreat. (Ḥ1:301--306.) oath of
allegiance (bayʿah) formal profession of loyalty and obedience rendered,
with an oath, to the Prophet and the Caliphs by each of their subjects.
Pharaoh (Ar. Firʿawn) title of the ancient rulers of Egypt in the
Qurʾan, Pharaoh is condemned as an evil ruler who refused to obey God
and his messenger, Moses. Persia see Fars Persian empire (Ar. Furs)
ruled by the Sasanian dynasty, defeated by the Muslims in the Battle of
Qādisiyyah in Iraq (bet. 14--17/635--638) and the Battle of Nahāwand in
Iran (21/642). pilgrimage see hajj and ʿumrah pledge of allegiance see
oath of allegiance pledge-breakers (Ar. nākithūn) appellation of those
who fought ʿAlī at the Battle of the Camel. (See further: Ḥ13:183--184;
B 771--772; F 364--365.) protected peoples (Ar. ahl al-dhimmah) also
called "people with a covenant," mem- bers of revealed religions, to
whom the early Islamic state provided protected sta- tus. Psalms (Ar.
Zabūr, pl. Zubur) David's book of hymns, to which reference is made in
the Qurʾan. Qādisiyyah small town south of present-day Najaf in Iraq,
site of a major Muslim victory over the Sasanians in ca. 16/637, which
opened Iraq and Persia to further conquest. Qarqīsiyā (Latin: Circesium)
Roman fortress city near the junction of the Euphrates and Khābūr rivers
at the empire's eastern frontier, corresponding to the present-day
village of Buṣayrah. Conquered by the Muslims in 18/638, Qarqīsiyā
continued to be contested by competing Muslim states due to its
strategic location between Syria and Iraq. Qaṣīr ibn Saʿd al-Lakhmī
(fl. 3rd c. ad), proverbial counsellor to the pre-Islamic Iraqi
AzdīkingJadhīmahibnMālikibnNaṣr.JadhīmahwaskilledbyZenobia(Ar.Zabbāʾ),
Queen of Palmyra, whose father he had killed, and whom he had set out to
wed against Qaṣīr's advice. qāsiṭūn see wrongdoers Qays ibn Saʿd (d. ca.
59/678), son of Muḥammad's Companion Saʿd ibn ʿUbādah al- Anṣārī, Qays
was ʿAlī's first governor in Egypt and one of his commanders at the
Battle of Ṣiffīn. (See further: Ḥ10:112; B 591.) al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 854
glossary of names, places, and terms Qiblah direction of the Kaʿbah in
Mecca, which all Muslims face in ritual prayer. Peo- ple of the Qiblah
refers to Muslims. Qurʾan (Ar. Qurʾān) holy book of the Muslims,
revealed by God to Muḥammad, also called The Book (Ar. Kitāb) and The
Wise Remembrance (Ar. al-Dhikr al-ḥakīm). Quraysh Muḥammad's tribe. They
lived in Mecca and were initially his bitter ene- mies, fighting him in
the Battles of Badr, Uḥud, and The Confederates. When Mu- ḥammad
conquered Mecca in 8/630, they reluctantly accepted Islam en masse.
Qutham ibn al-ʿAbbās (d. 56/676), cousin of Muḥammad and ʿAlī, brother
of ʿAbdal- lāhibnal-ʿAbbās,servedasʿAlī'sgovernorinchargeof
Mecca,Medina,andṬāʾif.(See further: Ḥ16:140--141.) Rabadhah early Muslim
settlement in the foothills of the Ḥijāz mountains, 200 kilo- meters to
the northeast of Medina, now an archaeological site marked by the
cistern of Abū Salīm. In early Islamic times it lay on the main
pilgrimage route from Kufa to Mecca. al-Rabīʿ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī
(d. ca. 48/668), participated in the Muslim conquest of Khurasan and
served as governor of Bahrain during ʿUmar's caliphate, and of Khurasan
during Muʿāwiyah's. (See further: Ḥ11:37.) Rabīʿah one of the two
largest tribal federations in ancient north Arabia (the other is Muḍar),
named for Rabīʿat al-Faras ibn Nizār ibn Maʿadd ibn ʿAdnān, eponymous
ancestor of the tribes of Bakr and Taghlib. Rabīʿah was divided among
ʿAlī and his opponents during the Battle of the Camel and Ṣiffīn. (See
further: B 772; Ḥ13:198.) Raḍī, Sharīf, Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn
(d. 406/1015) descendant of Muḥammad who lived in Abbasid Baghdad,
distinguished scholar and poet, compiler of Nahj al-Balāghah. Ramhormoz
(Ar. Rāmahurmuz) town in the Khuzistan province of southwestern Iran,
conquered by the Muslims in 17/638, reportedly the ancestral homeland of
Salman al-Fārisī. Raqqah town in northwest Syria on the Euphrates,
conquered by the Muslims in ca. 18/639. In 36/656, ʿAlī crossed the
Euphrates at Raqqah on his way to Ṣiffīn. Located close by, the burials
of ʿAlī's followers remain venerated places of Shiʿi pil- grimage. rare
words see gharīb Rass lit. well. The "people of Rass" (aṣḥāb al-Rass)
are mentioned in the Qurʾan, alongside ʿĀd and Thamūd, as unbelieving
peoples of ancient times, destroyed for their impiety (Q Furqān 25:38).
(See further: Ḥ10:94--95; B 589; R 2:191; F 303--304.) Rāwandī, Quṭb
al-Dīn (d. 573/1177), early Twelver Shiʿi commentator on Nahj al-
Balāghah, a jurist, exegete, theologian, and hadith scholar, student of
Ṭabrisī, author of around 60 books. He died in Qum and is buried there.
risālah letter, treatise, or message. Sabā (rendered into English as
Sheba; fl. before 7th c. ad), proverbial pre-Islamic al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 855 individual from Yemen. In the proverb,
"They dispersed like the hands of Sabā," Sabā's hands are a metaphor for
his sons. Warned by a sybil of the Maʾrib dam's imminent rupture, they
dispersed across Arabia. (See further: Ḥ7:74--75; B 403; R 1:432.)
Sacred House see Kaʿbah Saʿd ibn (Muḥammad) Abī Waqqāṣ (d. between
50/670 and 58/677), among the first Muslims, commander of the Arab
armies during the conquest of Iraq, and mem- ber of the Shūrā Council
that elected ʿUthmān. Saʿd was among the handful of prominent Companions
who refused to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī and sat out his bat- tles.
Saʿdān plant growing in the arid wastes of Arabia, prized for camel
pasturing, with a head of prickles that wound human feet. Ṣafiyyah bint
ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib (d. ca. 20/640), from the Hāshim clan of Quraysh,
paternal aunt of Muḥammad and ʿAlī, and mother of al-Zubayr ibn
al-ʿAwwām. Ṣafiyyah was one of the earliest converts to Islam and
migrated with Muḥammad to Medina. Ṣafwān ibn Umayyah al-Jumaḥī (d. ca.
41/661), one of the leaders of Quraysh who spearheaded the Battle of the
Confederates against Muḥammad. His father, Umay- yah ibn Khalaf, was
also Muḥammad's inveterate opponent. Ṣafwān converted to Islam after the
Battle of Ḥunayn, in 8/630. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.) Sahl
ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī (d. 38/658), of the Medinan Aws tribe, was an early
Com- panionandnarratorof
hadith.ʿAlī'sstaunchsupporter,Sahlreportedlydebatedwith Abū Bakr about
ʿAlī's rightful succession to Muḥammad. During ʿAlī's caliphate, he
served as governor in Medina, Basra, and Fars, and he fought in the
Battle of Ṣiffīn. He died in Kufa, soon after returning from Ṣiffīn.
Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ (d. 59/678), from the Umayyad clan of Quraysh,
ʿUthmān's governor of Kufa 29--34/649--655, and later, Muʿāwiyah's
governor of Medina. Saʿīd ibn Nimrān al-Hamdānī (d. ca. 70/689),
participated in the battles of Yarmūk and Qādisiyyah during the Muslim
conquests. A loyal follower of ʿAlī, Saʿīd served as hisscribe, and as
his governorinYemen.Laterimprisoned bytheUmayyadgovernor Ziyād for
denouncing the Umayyads' cursing of ʿAlī, alongside ʿAlī's supporter
Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī. Saʿīd was released, while Ḥujr was executed. Saʿīd ibn
Yaḥyā al-Umawī (d. 249/863), author of Maghāzī (Expeditions), a recen-
sion of the Book of Expeditions composed by his father, Abū Ayyūb Yaḥyā
ibn Saʿīd al-Umawī (d. 194/809). His father was a native of Kufa who
settled in Baghdad and had studied with Ibn Isḥāq (d. ca. 151/768),
author of one of the earliest Expedi- tions. Saʿīd ibn Zayd (d. 50 or
51/670--671), from Quraysh, cousin and brother-in-law of ʿUmar, and one
of the earliest Muslims. Saʿīd was among the handful of prominent
Medinans who refused to support ʿAlī during his caliphate. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 856 glossary of names,
places, and terms Salāmān ibn Ṭayy clan of the ancient Yemeni tribe of
Ṭayy (or Ṭayyiʾ) who migrated in the 2nd century ad to Syria, to what is
known as Jabal Ṭayy (later Jabal Sham- mār). Ṣāliḥ ancient Arabian
prophet sent to the tribe of Thamūd. The focus of his story is
thatGodsenthimwithacamelmareasadivinesign;histribekilledthecamelmare,
and God destroyed them in retribution. Ṣāliḥibn Sulaym (d. after
37/658), from the tribe of Salāmān ibn Ṭayy in Kufa, fol- lower of ʿAlī,
who was ill and unable to accompany him to Ṣiffīn. Salmān al-Fārisī
(d. 35/655), prominent early Companion of Muḥammad who came from Persia.
Muḥammad said, "Salmān is one of us, People of the House." Salmān was
also a close companion and staunch supporter of ʿAlī. Governor of
Madāʾin in ʿUmar's reign, he died and was buried there. (See further:
Ḥ19:34--39.) Saqīfah(Portico)
estateinMedinabelongingtotheSāʿidahclan,where,immediately
afterMuḥammad'sdeath,someof hisCompanionsgatheredandpledgedallegiance to
Abū Bakr as caliph. (See further: B 292--293.) Ṣaʿṣaʿah ibn Ṣūḥān
al-ʿAbdī (d. ca. 56/676), poet, orator, and chieftain of his tribe of
ʿAbd al-Qays, devoted supporter of ʿAlī who fought in all his battles
and attempted to
persuadetheKharijitestoreturntothefoldinthelead-uptotheBattleof
Nahrawān. After ʿAlī's death, at Muʿāwiyah's court, Ṣaʿṣaʿah discoursed
eloquently on ʿAlī's mer- its. In some reports, Muʿāwiyah exiled him to
Bahrain, where he died. In other reports, Ṣaʿṣaʿah paid homage to Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn when the latter returned from Kar- bala after Ḥusayn was
killed. Shariʿah (Ar. sharīʿah) lit. wide path to the watering hole,
term indicating the Law laid down by each of God's six major prophets:
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muḥammad. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī see
Raḍī. Shaybah ibn Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams (d. 2/624), chieftain of the
ʿAbd Shams clan of the Meccan Quraysh, slain by Muḥammad's uncle Ḥamzah
in single combat at the Battle of Badr. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F
365.) Shiʿa lit. followers, shortened from Shīʿat ʿAlī (followers of
ʿAlī), Muslims who believe that Muḥammad appointed ʿAlī through divine
revelation to lead the Muslim com- munity after him as Imam, and,
therefore, that ʿAlī was his rightful successor in both his temporal and
spiritual roles. Over time, three major branches of the Shiʿa evolved:
Twelver, Ismāʿīlī, and Zaydī. Shibām(orShabām) clanof
thelargeYemenitribeof Hamdan,mostof whomfought for ʿAlī at the Battle of
Ṣiffīn. The clan is unusually named after the mountain that is their
ancestral homeland, Shibām Kawkabān, northwest of Sanaa, and not after
an eponymous ancestor. Shūrā (consultation) electoral council set up by
ʿUmar to choose one of their mem- bers as the next caliph. The six
members consisted of ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān, who was al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary
of names, places, and terms 857 elected caliph by the council, ʿAlī ibn
Abī Ṭālib, who opposed the election, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf, who
presided, as well as al-Zubayr ibn al-ʿAwwām, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ, and
Ṭalḥah ibn ʿUbaydallāh. Shurayḥibn al-Ḥārith (d. ca. 80/699), of Yemeni
birth and Persian ethnicity, jurist, hadith scholar, and litterateur,
served as judge in Kufa during the caliphates of ʿUmar, ʿUthmān, ʿAlī,
and Muʿāwiyah. (See further: Ḥ14:28--29.) Shurayḥibn Hānī al-Ḥārithī
(d. 78/697), ʿAlī's loyal follower and one of his comman- ders at the
Battle of Ṣiffīn, who lived to an old age. Shurayḥchallenged Muʿāwiyah's
execution of ʿAlī's follower Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī, and was forced to flee to
Sijistān, where he was killed. (See further: Ḥ17:138.) Ṣiffīn site of
the major Battle of Ṣiffīn fought between ʿAlī and Muʿāwiyah in 37/657,
which ended in arbitration. Ṣiffīn was then an abandoned Byzantine
village near Raqqah, in north-central Syria, on the Euphrates River; it
is identified in the present day with the village named Abū Hurayrah.
The main extant source for the battle is Minqarī's Battle of Ṣiffīn
(Waqʿat Ṣiffīn). signature reply (Ar. tawqīʿ, pl. tawqīʿāt) signature or
seal placed on a decree. Solomon (Ar. Sulaymān) (fl. 10th c. bc),
biblical king of Israel, son and successor of
KingDavid,reveredalongsidehisfatherasaprophetinIslam.Solomonisfrequently
mentioned in the Qurʾan, particularly in connection with his knowledge
of the lan- guage of the birds, and his command over the jinn and the
winds. Sufyān ibn ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī (d. ca. 54/674), from the Ghāmid clan
of the Azd Sarāt tribe of western Arabia, who fought in the Muslim
conquests of Syria and became attached to the Umayyads. Sufyān served as
Muʿāwiyah's commander in his conflict with ʿAlī and led a notoriously
brutal raid against Anbar. Later, he commanded a large Umayyad force
against the Byzantines and was killed in the battle. Sufyānī lit. the
man from the Sufyān clan, whose harm is prophesied in §1.136.3. The
commentators state that it refers to the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd al-Malik.
(Ḥ9:47; B 486.) Suhayl ibn ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Shams (d. 18/639), of the
Umayyad clan of Quraysh, a leader in the Battle of the Confederates in
5/627 against the Muslims, an eloquent orator and one of Muḥammad's
fiercest enemies. Suhayl converted to Islam when Muḥammad conquered
Mecca and later participated with the Muslims in the Battle of Yarmūk.
(See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.) Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilālī
al-ʿĀmirī (d. 76/695), loyal follower of ʿAlī, who supported him before
his caliphate, and who, during his caliphate, participated in all his
bat- tles. Later, Sulaym remained a follower of ʿAlī's sons Ḥasan and
Ḥusayn and of Ḥusayn's son Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn. He is said to be the author
of a compilation of ʿAlī's sayings and sayings of the early Shiʿi Imams,
known as Kitāb Sulaym (Sulaym's Book). Sulaymān ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (r.
96--99/715--717), Umayyad caliph. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 858 glossary of names,
places, and terms Sumayyah (or Asmāʾ) bint al-Aʿwar (fl. 1st/7th c.),
from the ʿAbd Shams clan of the Zayd Manāt tribe of Tamīm, slave, mother
of the Umayyad governor Ziyād. Married to Muḥammad ibn ʿAbdallāh
al-Azraqī, Sumayyah is characterized in the sources as promiscuous.
Among the stories of Ziyād's parentage, one story recounts that
Muʿāwiyah's father, Abū Sufyān, boasted that he, Abū Sufyān, had "placed
Ziyād inside Sumayyah's womb." Sunnah, lit. "well-trodden path to a
waterhole," refers to the accepted practice of the pious forbears, and
when used without qualifiers, specifically to Muḥammad's. Sunni, lit.
"emulator of the Prophet's practice," someone belonging to the denomina-
tion of Muslims who believe that Muḥammad died without appointing an
heir, and who revere the first four leaders of the community---Abū Bakr,
ʿUmar, ʿUthmān, and ʿAlī---as Rightly Guided Caliphs. The term Sunni
emerged from the earlier political appellation, "people adhering to the
sunnah and majority." Surah (Ar. sūrah) one of the 114 chapters in the
Qurʾan. Syria (Ar. Shām) the Levant. Syria in early Islam included the
present-day nation states of Israel-Palestine, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon,
and southeastern Turkey. Then, too, the capital was Damascus. Syrians
(Ar. ahl al-Shām) refers, in the context of ʿAlī's caliphate, to
Muʿāwiyah and his supporters. ṬalḥahibnAbīṬalḥahal-ʿAbdarī (d.3/624),of
theclanof ʿAbdal-Dārof theQuraysh tribe, part of the Meccan opposition
against Muḥammad. Ṭalḥah was the Meccans' standard-bearer during the
Battle of Uḥud, where he was slain by Muḥammad's uncle Ḥamzah, or by
ʿAlī, and where his two brothers and four sons were also killed. Ṭalḥah
ibn ʿUbaydallāh (d. 36/656), of the Taym clan of the Meccan Quraysh
tribe, Muḥammad's Companion who later took part in the Muslim conquest
of Syria and Egypt and was a member of the Shūrā Council that elected
ʿUthmān. Ṭalḥah was killed leading the fight against ʿAlī in the Battle
of the Camel, outside Basra. Tamīm large tribe in central and eastern
Arabia. Their pedigree is Tamīm ibn Murr ibn Udd ibn Ṭābikhah ibn Ilyās
ibn Muḍar ibn Nizār ibn Maʿadd ibn ʿAdnān. In the early Islamic period,
both Basra and Kufa were extensions of Tamīm's territories. Tamīmīs in
Basra were further divided into the clans of Saʿd, Ḥanẓalah, and ʿAmr;
the Saʿd sat out the Battle of the Camel, but they fought for ʿAlī at
Ṣiffīn. (See fur- ther: Ḥ15:126--136.) Ṭaybah see Medina Taym clan of
the Quraysh tribe of Mecca, whose pedigree is Taym ibn Murrah ibn Kaʿb
ibn Luʾayy ibn Ghālib ibn Fihr. Abū Bakr and Ṭalḥah were from this clan.
Thaʿlab, Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad ibn Yaḥyā (d. 291/904), leading scholar of
the Kufan school of Arabic grammar, cited by Raḍī in Nahj al-Balāghah.
Thaʿlabiyyah caravan stop in Najd, on the Kufa-to-Mecca pilgrimage
route, in what al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 859 is now the northeastern corner of Saudi Arabia
toward the Iraqi border. Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī also stopped there en route to
Karbala. Thamūd ancient Arabian tribe that disappeared before the rise
of Islam. They are mentioned in the Qurʾan as an impious people who
disobeyed the Prophet Ṣāliḥ, slaughtered God's camel mare, and were
destroyed by an exemplary divine pun- ishment. Legend associates the
cliff dwellings around the northern Ḥijāzī town of Madāʾin Ṣāliḥwith the
Thamūd. Thaqīf north Arabian tribe of the Hawāzin federation who
controlled the walled town of Ṭāʾif in pre-Islamic times and were among
Muḥammad's staunchest ene- mies, until they converted to Islam after
their defeat at the Battle of Ḥunayn. The Thaqīf were a major trading
partner with Quraysh, and they intermarried exten- sively. Later the
Umayyads appointed several of their governors from Thaqīf. Tigris (Ar.
Dijlah) along with the Euphrates, one the two great rivers of Iraq. The
Tigris flows south from the mountains of the Armenian highlands through
the Syr- ian and Arabian deserts and empties into the Arabian/Persian
Gulf. Turks refers in the present volume to the Mongols who attacked the
Muslim heart- lands in the 7th/13th century under Chingiz Khan and his
grandson Hülegü Khan. ʿUbaydah ibn al-Ḥārith ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib
(d. 2/624), of the Hāshim clan of Qu- aysh, Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's
cousin, one of the earliest converts to Islam, killed fighting for
Muḥammad at the Battle of Badr. ʿUbaydallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib (d. 58/677), of the Hāshim clan of Quraysh, Muḥammad's and
ʿAlī's cousin, and ʿAlī's governor in Yemen. (See further: Ḥ1:341--343.)
ʿUbaydallāh ibn Abī Rāfiʿ (d. after 40/661), whose father, Abū Rāfiʿ,
was one of the first Muslims and
Muḥammad'sfreedman,wasʿAlī'sloyalfollower,who participated in all his
battles and served as his scribe in Kufa. (See further: B 1003; R
3:391.) Uḥud mountain 5 kilometers north of Medina, site of the second
major battle be- tween the Muslims and the Meccans, in 3/625, in which
the Muslims suffered heavy losses and Muḥammad's uncle Ḥamzah was
killed. ʿUmar ibn Abī Salamah al-Makhzūmī (d. 83/702), Muḥammad's
stepson and ward, son of his wife Umm Salamah from her previous husband.
ʿUmar served as ʿAlī's governor in Bahrain in the lead-up to the Battle
of Ṣiffīn. (See further: Ḥ16:173--174; B 869.) ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb (r.
13--23/634--644), of the ʿAdī clan of Quraysh, prominent Companion of
Muḥammad and father of his wife Ḥafṣah. ʿUmar was the second Sunni
caliph of the Muslim community, during whose rule the Muslim polity
under- went rapid expansion into Syria, Egypt, Iraq, and Iran. Umayyads
(Ar. Banū Umayyah) clan of the Quraysh tribe of Mecca and the first
dynasty to rule the Islamic world, beginning with Muʿāwiyah, who became
caliph following ʿAlī's death in 40/661. From their seat in Damascus,
the Umayyads ruled al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 860 glossary of names,
places, and terms until 132/750, when they were overthrown by the
Abbasids. The third Sunni caliph, ʿUthmān, was also from this clan.
Umayyah ibn ʿAbd Shams ibn ʿAbd Manāf (d. 2/624), ancestor of the
Umayyad clan of Quraysh, a leader of the Meccan opposition against
Muḥammad, killed at the Battle of Badr. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F
365.) Umm Hānī (Fākhitah) bint Abī Ṭālib (d. after 40/661), a learned
woman from the Hāshim clan of Quraysh, ʿAlī's sister and Muḥammad's
cousin, and close to both. Umm Hānī was one of the earliest Muslims, and
although her husband Hubayrah was not, Muḥammad spent many nights in
Mecca at their home. Muḥammad's Ascension (Ar. Miʿrāj) to the heavens is
reported to have taken place on one such night. ummī epithet used to
describe Muḥammad in the Qurʾan (Q Aʿrāf 7:157), variously interpreted
as: "Meccan," an attributive adjective formed from Umm al-Qurā, one of
the names of Mecca; or "unlettered"; or "of the community (ummah)"; or
"affiliated to previous scriptural communities." Umm Jamīl (Arwā) bint
Ḥarb (fl. 1st/7th c.), Muʿāwiyah's paternal aunt, from the Umayyad clan
of the Quraysh tribe, married to Muḥammad's paternal uncle and fierce
foe, Abū Lahab. Umm Jamīl actively sought to torment Muḥammad while he
lived in Mecca, and in the Surah that curses Abū Lahab, she is
characterized as "The
Woman-Who-Carries-Firewood-to-Hell"(Ar.ḥammālatal-ḥaṭab),(QMasad111:1--4).
(See further: Ḥ15:197; B 822; R 3:77; F 374; ʿA 681.) Umm al-Qurā see
Mecca ʿumrah the lesser pilgrimage to the Kaʿbah in Mecca, mandated,
along with the hajj, once in a lifetime for every Muslim, combining
rituals performed by Abraham and Muḥammad. Unlike the hajj, the ʿumrah
may be performed at any time in the year. Usāmah ibn Zayd (d. ca.
54/674), son of Muḥammad's Abyssinian freedwoman Bara- kah Umm Ayman and
Muḥammad's adopted son Zayd ibn al-Ḥārithah, born in Mecca in the early
years of Islam. In 11/632, Muḥammad put Usāmah in command of an
expedition to fight the Byzantines at Muʾtah, but the group turned back
just before Muḥammad died. Later, Usāmah was among the handful of
prominent Com- panions who refused to pledge allegiance to ʿAlī and sat
out his battles. ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams (d. 2/624), of the
Quraysh tribe, a leader of the Meccan opposition against Muḥammad,
killed at the Battle of Badr. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.)
ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān (r. 23--35/644--656), of the Umayyad clan of Quraysh,
third Sunni caliph of the Muslim community. ʿUthmān married two of
Muḥammad's daughters in succession, Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthūm. Major
Muslim conquests in Central Asia took place during his reign. Later, he
was accused of nepotism and corruption and killed in Medina by a group
of Muslims. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 glossary of names,
places, and terms 861 ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī (d. after 40/661), of
the Aws tribe of Medina, Com- panion of Muḥammad who served as ʿUmar's
tax collector in Iraq and ʿAlī's first gov- ernor in Basra. After the
Battle of the Camel, ʿAlī replaced Ibn Ḥunayf with ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-ʿAbbās as governor of Basra, and Ibn Ḥunayf left with ʿAlī for Kufa,
where he settled. (See further: Ḥ16:205--206.) ʿUthmān ibn Maẓʿūn
(d. 3/624), of the Jumaḥclan of Quraysh, one of Muḥammad's earliest
Companions, who took part in the first Muslim migration to Abyssinia,
returned soon thereafter, then migrated with Muḥammad to Medina.
al-Walīd ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (r. 86--96/715--705), Umayyad caliph.
al-Walīd ibn al-Mughīrah (d. 2/624), of the Makhzūm clan of Quraysh,
persecutor of Muḥammad's followers in Mecca and a leader of the Meccan
opposition against the Muslims at Medina, killed fighting against
Muḥammad at the Battle of Badr. (See further: B 776; Ḥ13:214; F 365.)
al-Walīd ibn ʿUqbah ibn Abī Muʿīṭ (d. 61/680), of the Umayyad clan of
Mecca's Quraysh tribe, whose father, ʿUqbah, was killed fighting against
Muḥammad at Badr. Walīd converted to Islam after the conquest of Mecca,
in 8/630. He was half-brother to ʿUthmān, who appointed him governor of
Kufa, then removed him from office because of his wine-drinking. Later,
Walīd supported Muʿāwiyah and fought against ʿAlī. (See further:
Ḥ17:227--245.) al-Walīd ibn ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah (d. 2/624), chieftain of
the ʿAbd Shams clan of Quraysh, Muʿāwiyah's maternal grandfather, slain
by ʿAlī in single combat at the Bat- tle of Badr. (See further: B 792; R
3:31; F 369; Ḥ4:34.) Wāqidī (d. 207/822), preeminent historian from
Medina, also jurist and judge, who settled in Baghdad. Wāqidī authored
many books, and only a portion of one book, Kitāb al-Maghāzī
(Expeditions), is extant. Names of his lost works, including Kitāb
al-Jamal (The Battle of the Camel), and copious quotations from them
survive in the historical literature. waṣiyyah testament, including but
not limited to a deathbed testament, containing moral advice and/or
instructions for distribution of property. Wise Remembrance see Qurʾan
wrongdoers (Ar. qāsiṭūn) appellation applied to Muʿāwiyah and the
Syrians who fought ʿAlī at the Battle of Ṣiffīn. (See further:
Ḥ13:183--184; B 771--772; F 364--365.) Yamāmah early Islamic town in the
Najd region of Arabia near Kharj, 70 kilometers southeast of the
present-day Saudi Arabian capital of Riyadh. al-Yamānī lit. the Yemeni,
the otherwise unidentified individual who narrated ora- tion §1.231 from
one Aḥmad ibn Qutaybah, identified by some commentators as the equally
mysterious Dhiʿlib al-Yamānī, one of ʿAlī's interlocutors in the present
vol- ume. Yanbuʿ al-Nakhl oasis with wellsprings and date groves, 120
kilometers east of Med- ina (different from the coastal town of Yanbuʿ
or Yenbo, formerly called Yanbuʿ al- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 862
glossary of names, places, and terms Baḥr). In pre-Islamic times, Yanbuʿ
al-Nakhl was a worship center for a deity called
Suwāʿ.MuḥammadconqueredYanbuʿal-Nakhlandreportedlybuiltamosquethere.
ʿAlī owned an estate there. (See further: Ḥ13:296.) Yazīd (ii) ibn ʿAbd
al-Malik (r. 101--105/720--724), Umayyad caliph. Yazīd ibn Abī Sufyān
(d. 18/639), from the Umayyad clan of the Quraysh tribe, and
Muʿāwiyah'sbrother.Yazīdwasoneof theMeccanswhofoughtagainstMuḥammad, and
after the conquest of Mecca in 8/630 converted to Islam. Afterward, he
fought in the Muslim army under ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣagainst the
Byzantines.When ʿAmr left for Egypt,heappointedYazīdinchargeof
Syria,wherehediedinthePlagueof Emmaus. (See further: Ḥ17:256--257.)
Yemen well-known region in the southwest of the Arabian Peninsula.
Muḥammad sent ʿAlī to Yemen in 10/632 to call its people to Islam. Yemen
and Yemenis feature in several texts in the present volume. Zanj black
slaves from East Africa brought into early Abbasid Iraq in large numbers
to work in the saltpeter mines near Basra. The Zanj rebelled three times
within a space of two centuries, including a violent, lengthy rebellion
under ʿAlī ibn Muḥam- mad al-Zanjī, which ravaged Basra from 255/869 to
270/883, causing immeasurable material damage and killing tens of
thousands of people. (See further: Ḥ8:126--214.) Zayd ibn Thābit
al-Anṣārī (d. ca. 55/674), of the Khazraj tribe of Medina, one of
Muḥammad's Companions, who served as his scribe and recorded passages of
the Qurʾan. Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn see ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Sajjād Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn. Zaynab bint Jaḥsh al-Asadiyyah (d. 20/641), Muḥammad's wife,
whom he married in 4/626, after her divorce from his freedman and
adopted son Zayd ibn Ḥārithah (Q Aḥzāb 33:37). (See further: Ḥ9:242.)
Ziyād ibn Abīhi (d. 53/673), also known as Ziyād ibn Abī Sufyān, deputy
for ʿAlī's governor ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās in Basra. Born out of
wedlock to a slave named Sumayyah, Ziyād was later declared his
half-brother by Muʿāwiyah and made gover- nor of Iraq. (See further:
Ḥ16:179--204.) Ziyād ibn al-Naḍr al-Ḥārithī (d. after 37/658), of the
Madhḥij tribe, fought for ʿAlī as a subcommander under his tribesman
Mālik al-Ashtar at Ṣiffīn and Nahrawān. al-Zubayr ibn al-ʿAwwām
(d. 35/656), of the Quraysh, son of Muḥammad's and ʿAlī's paternal aunt
Ṣafiyyah, one of the earliest Muslims, later a member of the Shūrā
Council that elected ʿUthmān. Zubayr was one of the leaders at the
Battle of the Camel against ʿAlī. He left the battlefield after the
fighting began but was killed by a personal enemy as he was leaving.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 © Tahera Qutbuddin,
2024 \| doi:10.1163/9789004682603_007 This is an open access chapter
distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd 4.0 license. Appendix of
Sources for the Texts of Nahj al-Balāghah This chronological list
enumerates all primary medieval sources I was able to locate for each of
the texts of Nahj al-Balāghah, before and after the time of Raḍī's
compilation in 400/1010. The list not only provides evidence for the
early spread of these texts, but it also offers a guide to a better
under- standing of their historical context. A large number of texts are
found in the earliest extant works of the Arabic-Islamic corpus: books
from the early 3rd/9th century by well-known authors, such as Minqarī
(d. 212/827), Abū ʿUbayd (d. 224/838), Ibn Saʿd (d. 230/845), Iskāfī
(d. 240/854), and Ibn Aʿtham (died early 3rd/9th c.), not to mention
copious transcriptions by late 3rd/9th- century and early
4th/10th-century historians such as Balādhurī (d. 279/892), Yaʿqūbī
(d. 284/897), Ṭabarī (d. 310/ 923), and Māmaṭīrī (d. ca. 360/971). Sev-
eral scholars have compiled print books and online websites that list
sources of Nahj al-Balāghah texts, ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ's 4-volume Maṣādir
Nahj al-balāghah wa-asānīduhu being one of the most important. The
present Appendix makes use of earlier inventories, but it also goes
beyond them to catalog sources they do not mention---it is possibly the
most complete list to date.1 My hope is that yet more sources will be
tracked---and compared and analyzed---by future researchers. 1 Logistics
-- Numbering: The numbering of texts in this Appendix corresponds to the
numbering in the present volume, including sub-numbers for longer texts.
-- Sequence: Within the list of citations for each text, the sequence of
authors is chronological, based on the author's death date. -- Names:
For the sake of concision, authors with a single book listed in the
Bibliography are noted only by name. For authors with more than one book
listed in the Bibliography, a truncated title is also provided. For
multiple authors with the same name, either their first name is also
given, or their 1
MythankstoTynanKellyforhisdedicatedandexpertassistanceinresearchingthisAppendix
of Sources. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 864 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah book title is listed alongside
their name of fame. The definite particle (al-) is omitted from names
and titles. -- Versions: Since the materials are attributed to ʿAlī's
time, when production and transmission were predominantly oral, and the
materials were initially transmitted in different oral recensions,
versions recorded in the written sources vary both in length and
language. Many are excerpts from larger texts. -- Raḍī's stated sources:
These are mentioned at the relevant place in the Appendix, and they
include four lost books, one extant book, and several oral transmitters
(also listed in the Introduction). Among books of earlier authors,
Raḍī's version is closest to the versions of Minqarī, Ḥarrānī, and
Māmaṭīrī, and also close to the versions of Sulaym, Ibn Aʿtham, Iskāfī,
Barqī, Ibn Qutaybah, Balādhurī, Yaʿqūbī, Ṭabarī, Abū al-Faraj, and
Ṣadūq. The rare words section follows Abū ʿUbayd's sequence. --
Commentaries: Nahj al-Balāghah commentaries are not listed as sources
for the obvious reason that they copy from it directly; instances are
listed in which Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd provides additional sources. --
Attributions to other speakers: A handful of texts are attributed in
other sources to other early figures, especially the Prophet Muḥammad;
these are flagged below. Chapter 1: Orations Text no. References 1.1.1
Thaqafī 1:170--176; Kulaynī 1:134--136; Ḥarrānī 61; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 170;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:294, 2:174 (attrib. ʿAlī al-Riḍā); Ḥātim, Tuḥfah 22;
Ibn Ṭalḥah 154. 1.1.2 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:97--98; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj
1:297--298; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ 2:388; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "J-W-Y";
Ibn Ṭalḥah 155; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "J-W-Y." 1.1.3 Ibn Ṭalḥah 156. 1.1.4--5
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:326, 367; Shahrastānī, Mafātīḥ2:327; Muʾayyad,
Ṭirāz 2:137. 1.1.6--7 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:137. 1.1.8 None 1.2.1 Muʾaddib
543; Ibn Ṭalḥah 285--286. 1.2.2 Ṭabarī-Āmulī 399; Āmidī 331, 354;
Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 187. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 865 (cont.) Text no. References 1.3
Shiqshiqiyyah Oration: Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (Ḥ1:205--206, cites the now lost
works of Abū al-Qāsim al-Balkhī, d. 319/931, chief of the Basran
Muʿtazilites, for a large portion of this oration). Ibn Mardawayh
134--135; Ābī 1:186--187; Ṭūsī, Talkhīṣal-Shāfī 3:53--57; Ibn Hibat
Allāh 484; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ2:388; Ḥumayd 1:111--112; Sibṭ124--125. 1.3.1 as
in §1.3 above, and Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:150; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 360--361; Mufīd,
Jamal 62, 92; Mufīd, Irshād 1:287; Abū al-Ṣalāḥ329; Ṭūsī, Amālī 372;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:282; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:48; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "J-Dh-Dh"; Sibṭ124; Qāsimī 249; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Ṭarāʾif 2:418. 1.3.2 as
in §1.3 above, and Ibn Ḥanbal, Faḍāʾil 1:151; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:151; Ṣadūq,
Maʿānī 361; Mufīd, Irshād 1:288; Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil 2:109--110; Karājikī,
Taʿajjub 99; ʿĀṣimī 1:257; Ṭūsī, Amālī 373; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī vol. 4
majlis 83; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:284; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:48; Ibn Ṭāwūs,
Ṭarāʾif 2:418. 1.3.3 as in §1.3 above, and Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:151; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:288; 286; Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil 2:109--110; Ṭūsī, Amālī 373;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:225; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:48; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Kh-Ḍ-M"; "Sh-N-Q"; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Ṭarāʾif 2:418. 1.3.4 as in §1.3
above, and Māmaṭīrī 255; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 362; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:152; Mufīd,
Ifṣāḥ46; Mufīd, Irshād 1:289; Ābī 1:274; Abū al-Ṣalāḥ240; Ṭūsī, Amālī
374; Muʾaddib 507; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:287; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:48; Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-L-Y," "Z-B-R-J," "ʿ-N-Z"; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Ṭarāʾif
2:418. 1.3.5 as in §1.3 above, and Māmaṭīrī 256; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:153;
Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 362; Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil 2:113; Ṭūsī, Amālī 374; Ṭabrisī,
Iḥtijāj 1:288; Maydānī, 1:369; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:49; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "Sh-Q-Sh-Q"; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Ṭarāʾif 2:419; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "Sh-Q-Sh-Q." 1.4 Ṭabarī-Āmulī 408; Mufīd, Irshād 1:253; Muʾaddib
196. 1.5 Ḥulwānī 56; Muʾaddib 298; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:127; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "D-M-J"; Sibṭ137; Ibn Ṭalḥah 287; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "D-M-J." 1.6 Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:487 (§37371); Ibn Shabbah 4:1257;
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:456, 458; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 403; Ṭūsī, Amālī 52. 1.7
Muʾaddib 223; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:323; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v.
"Kh-Ṭ-L"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Kh-Ṭ-L." 1.8 Mufīd, Jamal 175; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "W-L-J"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "W-L-J." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 866
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References 1.9 Mufīd, Jamal 177. 1.10 Mufīd, Irshād 1:251; Muʾaddib 110.
1.11 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:102; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:341. 1.12 Barqī 1:262.
1.13 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:316; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 151; Qummī
2:339; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:170, 5:76; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:364; Mufīd, Jamal
217; Ṭūsī, Amālī 702--703; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:250; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī
189; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:110; Yāqūt 1:436, s.v. "al-Baṣrah"; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "J-ʾ-J-ʾ"; Sibṭ79; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "J-ʾ-J-ʾ." 1.14 Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:317; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 151; Mufīd, Jamal 218;
Muʾaddib 243. 1.15 Yaʿqūbī 2:179; Masʿūdī, Ithbāt 120; Nuʿmān,
Sharḥ1:373; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:396; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:377; Ibn Abī
al-Ḥadīd 1:269 (cites Ibn al- Kalbī). 1.16 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 289; Jāḥiẓ,
Bayān 2:50--51; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 222, 230; Ibn Qutay- bah, Gharīb 1:360; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:260; Yaʿqūbī 2:211; Kulaynī 1:369, 8:96; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 4:157; Māmaṭīrī 317--319; Nuʿmān, Ikhti- lāf 174; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim
1:97; Mufīd, Irshād 1:231; Hārūnī 258, 270; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 554;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 140; Ṭūsī, Amālī 235; Muʾaddib 255; Warrām 2:103; Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "W-Sh-M"; Ibn Ṭalḥah 156. 1.17 Iskāfī, Miʿyār
289; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb 1:360; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:99; Yaʿqūbī
2:211; Kulaynī 1:55; Māmaṭīrī 318--319; Makkī 1:246; Harawī
s.v. "Kh-B-Ṭ"; Mufīd, Irshād 1:231; Hārūnī 259; Muwaffaq biʾllāh
554--555; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 160; Ṭūsī, Amālī 235; Muʾaddib 112, 153;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:390; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Kh-B-Ṭ"; Ibn
Ṭalḥah 247. 1.18 Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:389; Ibn Ṭalḥah 248. 1.19 Abū
al-Faraj, Aghānī 20:10; Khaṭīb, Riḥlah 131; Ibn ʿAsākir 46:38. 1.20
Kulaynī 1:405. 1.21 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:436; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ87; Muʾaddib
203; Fattāl 490. 1.22 Kulaynī 5:53; Mufīd, Jamal 144; Mufīd, Irshād
1:251; Hārūnī 291--292; Ṭūsī, Amālī 169; Muʾaddib 110, 407; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Dh-M- R," "H-B-L," "N-Ṣ-F"; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr,
Usd 3:21; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 1:305 (cites Abū Mikhnaf); Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "Dh-M-R." 1.23 Minqarī 10; Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:360; Ibn Qutaybah,
Imāmah 1:70; Thaqafī 80; Yaʿqūbī 2:207; Kulaynī 2:154, 5:57; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 2:208; al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 867 (cont.) Text no. References Makkī
2:13; Māmaṭīrī 228--229; Qummī 2:36; ʿAbdallāh al-Ḥimyarī 38; Kūfī 106;
Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "Y-S-R"; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:267; Ibn ʿAsākir
42:502; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Gh-F-R," "F-L-J"; Ibn Kathīr,
Bidāyah 8:8. 1.24 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-Ṣ-B"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "ʿ-Ṣ-B." 1.25 Ibn Saʿd 5:93; Balādhurī 2:383; Thaqafī 2:636; Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 3:293; Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:150; Ibn Ḥibbān 2:301; Ṭabrisī,
Iḥtijāj 1:257; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:535; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "F-R-W"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "F-R-W." 1.26.1 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah
1:157; Thaqafī 1:303; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 408; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 174. 1.26.2 Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:176; Thaqafī 1:307; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 416; Ibn Shahrāshūb
2:47. 1.26.3 Thaqafī 1:317--318. 1.27 Ibn Aʿtham 4:236--238; Jāḥiẓ,
Bayān 2:53; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:261; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb 2:137; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:261; Balādhurī 2:442; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 211;
Thaqafī 2:474; Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:20; Kulaynī 5:4; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:160;
Abū al-Faraj, Aghānī 16:286; Abū al-Faraj, Maqātil 47; Māmaṭīrī
291--293; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:390; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ 2:75; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī
309--310; Ābī 1:297; Hārūnī 266--268; Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb, 6:123; Fattāl 363.
1.28 Ibn al-Mubārak 1:86; Minqarī 3--4; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:100; Ibn
Ḥanbal, Faḍāʾil 1:530; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Qiṣar 1:26, 50; Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim,
Zuhd 1:130; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 283; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:52; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn
2:259; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:70; Thaqafī 2:633--635; Yaʿqūbī
2:208--209; Naḥ- ḥās 280; Ḥarrānī 153; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:159; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:418; Ibn ʿAdī 6:316, 6:454, 9:33 (attrib. Prophet); Māmaṭīrī 211
(attrib. Prophet via ʿAlī), 421; Ṣadūq, Faqīh 1:516; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 51;
Bāqillānī 145; Mufīd, Irshād 1:235; Ābī 1:323; Hārūnī 270, 565 (attrib.
Prophet via ʿAlī); Muwaf- faq biʾllāh 554, 584; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 44; Ibn
Ḥamdūn 1:63; Bayhaqī, Shuʿab 13:172 (§10129); Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 363;
Ibn ʿAsākir 1:268; Warrām 2:103; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:7; Suyūṭī 3:219.
1.29 Ibn Aʿtham 4:257--259; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 98; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:56; Ibn
Qutay- bah, Imāmah 1:171; Balādhurī 2:380; Thaqafī 2:482; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 1:105, 4:161; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:391; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:73; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:273; Ṭūsī, Amālī 180; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:117 (cites Kulaynī);
Ibn ʿAsākir 1:320; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "N-Ṣ-N-Ṣ"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "Ḥ-Y-D," "F-W-Q." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 868 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.30 Abū al-Faraj, Aghānī 16:248; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 418; Muʾaddib 403; Ibn
ʿAsākir 5:177; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 180 (cites Kulaynī). 1.31 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān
3:221; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:291; Mufaḍḍal 301; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:64;
Māmaṭīrī 398--399, 430; Mufīd, Jamal, 180; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq
s.v. "ʿ-D-W"; Ibn ʿAsākir 18:405; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-D-W";
Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "ʿ-D-W"; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:169 (cites Ibn Bakkār); Ibn
Khallikān 5:8. 1.32 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:59; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:261
(attrib. Muʿāwiyah); Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:176 (attrib. Muʿāwiyah);
Bāqillānī 148 (attrib. Muʿāwiyah); Warrām 2:102; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "K-ʿ-M"; Ibn Ṭalḥah 176; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "K-ʿ-M." 1.33
Mufīd, Irshād 1:247--248. 1.34 Sulaym 2:213; Ibn Aʿtham 4:260--261; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:172; Balād- hurī 2:477; Thaqafī 1:36; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh
5:90--91; Mufīd, Amālī 146--147; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-M-S";
Ibn Ṭalḥah 290; Sibṭ106; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Ḥ-M-S." 1.35 Ibn Qutaybah,
Imāmah 1:163; Balādhurī 2:477--478; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:77; Masʿūdī, Murūj
2:297; Abū al-Faraj, Aghānī 10:12; Ābī 1:319; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr,
Kāmil 2:688; Ibn Ṭalḥah 290; Sibṭ103; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:259 (cites
Minqarī); Nuwayrī 20:169; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:317. 1.36 Ibn Bakkār
122; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:168; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:84; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "B-J-R," "H-Ḍ-M"; Sibṭ100; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (cites
Muḥammad ibn Ḥabīb), 2:283; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "B-J-R," "H-Ḍ-M." 1.37
Kulaynī 1:455 (attrib. anon. addressing ʿAlī); Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:53;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 313; Ṣadūq, Man 2:593. 1.38.1 Ibn Aʿtham 2:539; Āmidī 98;
Muʾaddib 179. 1.38.2 Minqarī 95 (attrib. Ashtar); Iskāfī, Miʿyār 126
(attrib. Ashtar); Abū Ḥanī- fah al-Dīnawarī 164 (attrib. Ashtar). 1.39
Balādhurī 2:404; Thaqafī 1:297, 2:453; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:107; Ibn ʿAsākir
34:432; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Dh-ʾ-B"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "Dh-ʾ-B." 1.40 Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:562 (§37930); Minqarī 489; Shāfiʿī
4:229; Ibn Shādhān 474; Balādhurī 2:352, 355; Yaʿqūbī 2:191; Mubarrad,
Kāmil 3:152; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:72--73; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:232; Nuʿmān,
Daʿāʾim 1:393; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:9; Makkī 1:434; Miskawayh 1:557; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ113; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Fiqh 1:375; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:369.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 869 (cont.) Text no. References 1.41
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 96; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ98; Muʾaddib 27, 152; Warrām 3:43; Ibn
Ṭalḥah 209. 1.42 Sulaym 2:261; Minqarī 3--4; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:100
(§34495); Ibn Aʿtham 2:490--491; Barqī 1:211; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:381;
Balādhurī 2:114; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Qiṣar, 50; Yaʿqūbī 2:208--209;
Kulaynī 2:335, 8:58, Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:418; Māmaṭīrī 211 (attrib. Prophet
via ʿAlī), 421; Ibn ʿAdī 6:316 (attrib. Prophet); Ḥarrānī 204; 8:58;
Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 51; Mufīd, Amālī 345; Mufīd, Irshād 1:236; Abū Nuʿaym
1:76; Ābī 1:324; Hārūnī 224; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 554; Bayhaqī, Shuʿab
13:172 (§10129); Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 44; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 363; Ibn ʿAsākir
1:268; Ibn al-Jawzī, Tabṣirah 1:156; Warrām 1:253, 2:75; Sibṭ122--123;
Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:6. 1.43 Minqarī 55; Ibn Aʿtham 2:510; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:114; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 163; Ibn ʿAsākir 59:130.
1.44 Balādhurī 2:417; Thaqafī 1:366, 2:770; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:130;
Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:402; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:719. 1.45 Ṣadūq,
Man 1:514; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 583--584; Fattāl 440; Muʾaddib 148. 1.46
Minqarī 132--133; Ibn Aʿtham 2:461; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ2:979 (§1343) (attrib.
Prophet); Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:347; Ṣadūq, Man 2:526; Ḥarbī, Gharīb
s.v. W-ʿ-Th (attrib. Prophet); Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "W-ʿ-Th" (attrib.
Prophet); Warrām 1:134. 1.47 Ibn al-Faqīh 201--202; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:252--253. 1.48 Minqarī 131--132; Ibn Aʿtham 2:551; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 131;
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al- Athīr s.v. "L-Ṭ-L-Ṭ"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "L-Ṭ-L-Ṭ."
1.49 Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:311; Muʾaddib 413. 1.50 Sulaym 2:262; Iskāfī, Miʿyār
291; Barqī 1:208, 218; Yaʿqūbī 2:191; Kulaynī 1:54, 8:58; Tawḥīdī,
Baṣāʾir 1:36; Hārūnī 270, 272; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 153. 1.51 Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-M-S"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "ʿ-M-S." 1.52.1 Ṣadūq, Man 1:518;
Mufīd, Amālī 159; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ663; Muʾaddib 108; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "M-Q-L"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "M-Q-L." 1.52.2 Ṣadūq, Man 1:519;
Mufīd, Amālī 159; Abū Nuʿaym 1:77; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ663. 1.52.3 Ṣadūq, Man
1:520; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ664. 1.53 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 2:240 (attrib. a
Bedouin); Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:176; Thaqafī 1:310; Kulaynī 2:123; Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 4:162; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 417; Mufīd, Irshād 1:244--245; Mufīd,
Jamal 144; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:222 (attrib. "ʿarab"); Raḍī, Majāzāt 251; Ibn
Abī al-Ḥadīd 1:340 (cites Abū Mikhnaf); Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "D-K-K"; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 181. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 870
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References 1.54 Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:167; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 1:94; Māmaṭīrī
376; Abū al-Faraj, Maqātil 48. 1.55 Sulaym 2:244; Minqarī 520--521;
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 184--185; Mufīd, Irshād 1:268; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:103;
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 1:348 (cites Wāqidī). 1.56 Nuʿaym 1:164; Balādhurī
2:119; Kūfī 2:64, 417; Kulaynī 2:219; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:69; Mufīd, Irshād
1:322; Ṭūsī, Amālī 210; Muʾaddib 174; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Kharāʾij
1:202; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:107; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "D-Ḥ-Q"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "D-Ḥ-Q." 1.57 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 186; Ibn Aʿtham 4:257; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:168; Bal- ādhurī 2:369; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 208;
Thaqafī 2:492; Yaʿqūbī 2:193; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:84; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim
1:391; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 672; Ṭūsī, Amālī 180--181; Ibn ʿAsākir 1:321; Ibn
Shahrāshūb 2:107; Majd al- Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-B-R"; Ibn Ṭalḥah
293; Sibṭ100; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "ʾ-B-R." 1.58.1 Mubarrad, Kāmil 3:139;
Dāraquṭnī 4:151. 1.58.2 Mubarrad, Kāmil 3:139. 1.58.3 Masʿūdī, Murūj
2:401; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:218; Ṣadūq, Kamāl 120. 1.59 Āmidī 89; Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 4:102--103; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:552; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:13 (cites
Ibn Dāʾūd). 1.60 Fattāl 440; Āmidī 10, 88, 199; Muʾaddib 108, 148.
1.61.1 Ḥarrānī 274; Mufīd, Irshād 1:234; Muʾaddib 152, 191, 202, 396;
Sibṭ145; Ibn ʿAsākir 33:300. 1.61.2 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 270; Āmidī 104--105,
154, 246; Ibn ʿAsākir 33:300; Ibn Ṭal- ḥah 289. 1.61.3 Ibn ʿAsākir
33:300. 1.62.1 Āmidī 238; Muʾaddib 375. 1.62.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:164;
Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 43. 1.63 Minqarī 235; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:285; Ibn Qutaybah,
ʿUyūn 1:171; Ibn Qutay- bah, Gharīb 1:363; anon. 3rd/9th c. author,
Akhbār al-dawlah al- ʿAbbāsiyyah, 119; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 45; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:377; Furāt 431; Māmaṭīrī 416--417; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ75; Ābī 1:269;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 580-- 581; Muʾaddib 341; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 142;
Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "Z-N-N"; Ibn Ṭalḥah, Maṭālib 291; Ibn ʿAsākir
42:460. 1.64 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ86. 1.65 Balādhurī 2:404; Thaqafī 1:301;
Yaʿqūbī 2:194; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:110; Māmaṭīrī 287; Ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd
(after Madāʾinī) 6:94. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 871 (cont.) Text no. References 1.66
Balādhurī 2:437; Thaqafī 2:451; Yaʿqūbī 2:195--196; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh
5:134; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-M-D," "F-W-Q," "N-S-M," "W-J-R."
1.67 Ibn Saʿd 3:36; Muḥammad ibn Ḥabīb 121; Balādhurī 2:495; Ibn Qutay-
bah, Imāmah 1:180; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:432; Qālī, Dhayl 190; Abū al-Faraj,
Maqātil 53; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istīʿāb 3:1127; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq
s.v. "ʾ-W- D"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "L-D-D"; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:738; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Usd 4:37. 1.68 Mufīd,
Ikhtiṣāṣ154; Mufīd, Irshād 1:278; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:254; Zamakh- sharī,
Fāʾiq s.v. "W-Y-L"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "M-L-Ṣ," "W-Y-L." 1.69
Ibn Abī Shaybah 6:66 (§29520); Iskāfī, Miʿyār 272; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb
1:373; Thaqafī 1:160; Ḥarbī 2:569; Qālī, Dhayl 173; Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam
awsaṭ9:43; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 138; Ḥātim, Tuḥfah 54--55; Zamakh- sharī,
Fāʾiq s.v. "D-Ḥ-Q"; Sibṭ127. 1.70 Balādhurī 2:263; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
5:192; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-M-R"; Sibṭ78. 1.71 None 1.72
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Q-R-F"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Q-R-F." 1.73
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 278; Ḥulwānī 50; Ḥarrānī 213; Māmaṭīrī 208; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ 111; Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 3:27; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 535; Ḥuṣrī 1:79;
Karājikī, Kanz 162; Muʾaddib 261, 314; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 42; Ibn Ṭalḥah
292. 1.74 Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:469 (§37304); Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:329; Ibn
Ḥanbal, ʿIlal 2:163; Abū al-Faraj, Aghānī 12:169; Azharī 15:22
s.v. "W-Dh-M"; Abū Hilāl, Jamharah 1:165; Jawharī s.v. "W-Dh-M"; Harawī
s.v. "W-Dh-M"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "T-R-B," "W-Dh-M"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "T-R-B," "Q-Ṣ-B," "W-Dh-F," "W-Dh-M." 1.75 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 232;
Kulaynī 4:432--433; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376. 1.76 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:83;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 500; Māmaṭīrī 347--349; Ṭabrisī, Iḥti- jāj 1:357; Sibṭ158;
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:269 (cites Ibrāhīm ibn Aḥmad Ibn Dayzīl's Kitāb
Ṣiffīn); Ibn Ṭāwūs, Faraj 57; Qurṭubī 19:29. 1.77 Kulaynī 5:517 (attrib.
Prophet); Ṣadūq, Amālī 380; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 14; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 251; Mufīd,
Ikhtiṣāṣ226; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 418; Fattāl 434; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 208; Sibṭ79;
Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 181 (cites Kulaynī). 1.78 Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:240
(§35683, attrib. Sufyān \[al-Thawrī?\]); Ḥarrānī 58; Kulaynī 5:71;
Māmaṭīrī 365; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 14; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 251; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Jāmiʿ 2:16, 387 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Muʾaddib 148; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 47; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 15; Fattāl 434; Āmidī 119; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt
208. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 872 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.79 Ḥulwānī 66; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Dhāmm 21; Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:125; Ibn
Durayd, Mujtanā 19; Qālī, Amālī 2:120; Ḥarrānī 201; Masʿūdī, Murūj
2:415; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:119; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ118; Hārūnī 505; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 536; Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:153; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 46; Karājikī, Kanz
160; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 43; Fattāl 445; Āmidī 86; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 469;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 364; Warrām 1:272, 2:104; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "S-ʿ-Y"; Sibṭ136. 1.80 Gharrāʾ Oration 1.80.1 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
4:163; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 3:18. 1.80.2 Hārūnī 275; Abū Nuʿaym 1:78;
Muʾaddib 144; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 70; Muʾay- yad, Ṭirāz 3:18. 1.80.3 Hārūnī
275; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 64; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 3:18. 1.80.4 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
3:23. 1.80.5 Ḥarrānī 210; Māmaṭīrī 209; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 535--536;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 66; Muʾaddib 340. 1.80.6 Ḥarrānī 210; Abū Nuʿaym
1:78--79; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 66; Muʾaddib 59, 359-- 360. 1.80.7 Ḥarrānī 210;
Māmaṭīrī 209--210; Abū Nuʿaym 1:78; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 66; Muʾaddib 512;
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "J-R-Sh," "B-Ḍ-Ḍ"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "B-Ḍ-Ḍ." 1.80.8 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 70; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "N-Ḥ-B"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "N-Ḥ-B." 1.80.9 Ḥarrānī 211; Māmaṭīrī 210;
Abū Nuʿaym 1:79; Muʾaddib 260, 359; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 72. 1.80.10--11
Muʾaddib 507, 542. 1.80.12 None 1.80.13 Ḥulwānī 49; Ḥarrānī 202;
Muʾaddib 109, 191, 512. 1.81 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:251; Balādhurī 2:127,
145, 151; Thaqafī 2:513--515; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:88; Nuʿmān, Manāqib 273;
Tawḥīdī, Imtāʿ 390; Bay- haqī, Maḥāsin 54; Ṭūsī, Amālī 132--133;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:268; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-L-L,"
"T-L-ʿ-B," "R-Ḍ-K-h"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "ʾ-L-L." 1.82.1 None 1.82.2 Hārūnī
275; Abū Nuʿaym 1:78; Muʾaddib 438; Sibṭ131. 1.82.3 Ibn Ṭalḥah 246.
1.83.1--2 None 1.83.3 Minqarī 10; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 153; Muʾaddib
314, 368. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 873 (cont.) Text no. References 1.83.4
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 284; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 228; Ḥarrānī 150; Barqī 1:289; Kulaynī
1:45; Mufīd, Amālī 206; Abū Hilāl 1:74; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 244; Muʾaddib
47, 112, 142, 526; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:341. 1.84.1 Ibn Durayd, Mujtanā
1:21; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 72, 162; Āmidī 290. 1.84.2 Hārūnī 258. 1.84.3 None
1.85 Kulaynī 8:64; Mufīd, Irshād 1:291; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "ʾ-Z-L"; Muʾaddib 361. 1.86 Qummī 1:2--3; Kulaynī 1:60; Muʾayyad,
Ṭirāz 2:179. 1.87 Āmidī 285; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 72; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "S-J-Y." 1.88 AshbāḥOration 1.88.1 Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 48--49;
Hārūnī 287. 1.88.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:164; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 50, 51, 55;
Hārūnī 288. 1.88.3 Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 53; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:135. 1.88.4
Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 54, 55. 1.88.5 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "W-Sh-J"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "W-Sh-J"; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Faraj 56. 1.88.6 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:310. 1.88.7 Āmidī 329; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-S-L"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "ʾ-S-L." 1.88.8 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Z-ʿ-R,"
"S-H-B," "H-M-D"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "S-H-B," "H-M-D," "Z-ʿ-R." 1.88.9 None
1.88.10 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "D-Y-J-R"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "D-Y-J-R." 1.88.11 Muʾaddib 401. 1.89 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:434;
Miskawayh 1:458; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:378; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil
2:556. 1.90.1 Sulaym 2:256; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:528 (§37734); Thaqafī 1:3;
Yaʿqūbī 2:193; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:38, 286; Abū Nuʿaym 1:68. 1.90.2 Ibn Abī
Shaybah 7:528 (§37734); Thaqafī 1:7; Yaʿqūbī 2:193; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:39,
231, 311; Nuʿmān, Manāqib 261; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:318. 1.90.3 Sulaym
2:256; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:528 (§37734); Thaqafī 1:8; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-Z-B." 1.90.4 Sulaym 2:256; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:528
(§37734); Thaqafī 1:10; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-Dh-M"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "ʿ-Dh-M." 1.90.5 Sulaym 2:258; Thaqafī 1:12. 1.91.1 Iskāfī,
Miʿyār 255; Thaqafī 1:172; Kulaynī 1:134; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 42. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 874 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.91.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:165; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 72. 1.91.3 Kulaynī 1:135;
Muʾaddib 192. 1.92--93 None 1.94.1 Sulaym 2:213; Mufīd, Amālī 146;
Mufīd, Irshād 1:277; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:254; Muʾaddib 506; Warrām 2:104.
1.94.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:161; Mufīd, Irshād 1:280; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj
1:255. 1.94.3 Sulaym 2:213; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:172; Thaqafī
2:451--453, 494; Mufīd, Irshād 1:282; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:257; Ibn
ʿAsākir 42:492. 1.94.4 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 241; Kulaynī 2:236; Mufīd, Irshād
1:237; Warrām 1:575; Sibṭ 137; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:6. 1.95 Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:174; Thaqafī 2:487--488; Ḥarrānī 185; Ṭabarānī,
Muʿjam kabīr 3:102; Ibn ʿAsākir 14:178. 1.96 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 271; Ṣadūq,
Amālī 478; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 198; Ṣadūq, Man 1:429; Māmaṭīrī 235; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 58; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ381; Muʾaddib 88; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 209; Warrām
2:506. 1.97--98--99 None 1.100.1 Kulaynī 8:17; Ḥarrānī 202; Hārūnī 508;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 56--58; Muʾaddib 90--92; Ibn Ṭalḥah 258--259. 1.100.2
Muʾaddib 29, 163; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 160. 1.100.3 Khalīl s.v. "N-W-M"; Abū
ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:356; Nuʿaym 1:259; Dārimī 1:318; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb
1:110; Ibn Qutaybah, Taʾwīl 424; Ibn Qutay- bah, ʿUyūn 2:380; Ibn
Durayd, Jamharah 2:992; Māmaṭīrī 322; Makkī 1:276, 333; Mufīd, Irshād
1:248; Ibn Khālawayh 313; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "N-W-M"; Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 2:129; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "N- W-M"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "N-W-M"; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:6. 1.101 Mufīd, Irshād 1:248.
1.102.1 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 277; Qummī 1:384; Ḥarrānī 238; Mufīd, Irshād
1:276; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Kh-Ḍ-D"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Kh-Ḍ-D."
1.102.2 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 278; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 403; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Ṣ-W- Ḥ." 1.103.1 Sulaym 2:179; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 260; Thaqafī 1:138;
Kulaynī 2:49; Ḥarrānī 162; Māmaṭīrī 224; Mufīd, Amālī 275; Ṭūsī, Amālī
37; Muʾaddib 513; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 132. 1.103.2 Ibn Abī Shaybah 6:66
(§29520); Iskāfī, Miʿyār 276; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb 1:373; Thaqafī 1:160;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 138; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "D-Ḥ-W." al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix
of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 875 (cont.) Text no.
References 1.103.3 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 276--277. 1.104 Minqarī 256; Iskāfī,
Miʿyār 149; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:25; Kulaynī 5:40; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:162;
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-S-S," "H-M-M," "Y-ʾ-F- Kh." 1.105.1
Muʾaddib 242. 1.105.2 Āmidī 85, 209; Muʾaddib 319; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:445; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:136 (from Nahj al-Balāghah). 1.105.3 Muʾaddib
79. 1.106.1 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:166. 1.106.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:167;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:313. 1.106.3 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 284--285; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 4:168. 1.106.4 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 288; Muʾaddib 544. 1.106.5 Muʾaddib
161, 499; Ṭabrisī, Makārim 10. 1.107 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 281; Barqī 1:289;
Yaʿqūbī 2:96 (attrib. Prophet); Ahwāzī, Zuhd 13; Ḥarrānī 149; Ṣadūq,
ʿIlal 1:247; Ṣadūq, Man 1:205; Ṭūsī, Amālī 216. 1.108.1 Iskāfī, Miʿyār
264--265; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:126 (attrib. Qaṭarī ibn al-Fujāʾah); Kulaynī
8:256; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:178 (attrib. Yazīd ibn Muʿāwiyah); Ḥar- rānī
180--181; Hārūnī 261; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 60; Muʾaddib 233; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-B-H," "ʾ-J-J"; Ibn Ṭalḥah 252; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:242
(cites Marzubānī). 1.108.2 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 265--267; Ḥarrānī 182; Hārūnī
262; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 60; Ibn Ṭalḥah 253; Nuwayrī 7:252. 1.108.3 Iskāfī,
Miʿyār 267--268; Ḥarrānī 182; Hārūnī 262; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "J-N-N"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "J-N-N." 1.109 None 1.110 Āmidī 86, 189;
Muʾaddib 145; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:63; Warrām 1:247; Ibn Ṭalḥah 176.
1.111.1 Naḥḥās 352. 1.111.2 Ḥarrānī 219; Naḥḥās 353 (attrib. Zayd ibn
ʿAlī); Ṭūsī, Amālī 443; Muʾaddib 147, 157; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 42; Warrām
2:494; Ibn Ṭalḥah 260. 1.111.3 Muʾaddib 370; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:10.
1.112 Ṣadūq, Man 1:535; Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ527; Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb 3:154;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:128--129; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-D-R,"
"Dh-H-B," "Sh-F- W"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Ḥ-D-R." 1.113.1 Ṣadūq, Man 1:428;
Ṭūsī, Miṣbāḥ381; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:136 (from Nahj al-Balāghah). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 876 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.113.2 Ḥarbī 2:451; Ibn al-Faqīh 223; Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:150; Azharī
s.v. "Kh-Ḍ- R"; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "F-R-W"; Ibn ʿAsākir 12:226;
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Kh-Ḍ-R," "F-R-W," "W-Dh-Kh." 1.114 None
1.115 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:165; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:79; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
2:259 (cites Wāqidī and Madāʾinī). 1.116 Thaqafī 2:626; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "Th-F-L." 1.117 Sulaym 2:142; Ḥarrānī 152; Āmidī 81--83;
Muʾaddib 104; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:78. 1.118 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 241; Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 4:163; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ155; Zamakh- sharī, Rabīʿ 2:178;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:273; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "M-R-H." 1.119
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:274. 1.120 Yaʿqūbī 2:209; Kulaynī 5:53; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 5:86; Mufīd, Jamal 190-- 191 (cites Wāqidī); Mufīd, Irshād 1:253;
Ṭūsī, Amālī 169; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 185. 1.121 Minqarī 235; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:172; Thaqafī 2:512; Kulaynī 5:39; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "K-Sh-Sh"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "K-Sh-Sh." 1.122.1 Minqarī 235,
295; Ibn Aʿtham 3:49; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:16; Kulaynī 5:39; Mufīd, Irshād
1:266; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ75; Muʾaddib 341, 370; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr,
Kāmil 2:648; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:292. 1.122.2 Minqarī 236, 392;
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:17; Kulaynī 5:39; Mufīd, Irshād 1:266; Muʾaddib 507;
ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:656. 1.123 Minqarī 542; Iskāfī, Miʿyār
199; Thaqafī 1:34--35; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:66; Mufīd, Irshād 1:271; Hārūnī
281; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:275; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "K-Ẓ-M."
1.124 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:174; Thaqafī 1:75; Kulaynī 4:31; Ḥarrānī
185; Mufīd, Amālī 176; Ṭūsī, Amālī 195; Muʾaddib 108; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al- Athīr, s.v. "Kh-D-N"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Kh-D-N"; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
1:182 (cites Madāʾinī). 1.125 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:85; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
2:211, 4:162; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:398; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "B-J-R"; Qurṭubī 2:154. 1.126 Balādhurī 2:369; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 41;
Karākijī, Maʿdin 226; Āmidī 329; Ṭabrisī, Tafsīr 5:353; Ibn Shahrāshūb
2:107. 1.127 Āmidī 320; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:456. 1.128 Kulaynī 8:207;
Ṣadūq, Man 2:275; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 120; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istīʿāb 1:357;
Muʾaddib 416, 553; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:375 (cites Jawharī). al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 877 (cont.) Text no. References 1.129
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 277; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 2:531; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v.
"Ẓ-ʾ-R," "W-ʿ-Y"; Sibṭ120; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Ẓ-ʾ-R." 1.130.1 None 1.130.2
Āmidī 282; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "W-F-Z," "H-B-L." 1.131.1, 5
None 1.131.2 Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 7. 1.131.3 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:159; Āmidī
88; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:136. 1.131.4 Muʾaddib 147. 1.132 Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "K-N-F." 1.133 Ibn Aʿtham 2:380; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī
vol. 4, majlis 56. 1.134 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 105; Mufīd, Irshād 1:243; Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "F-L- T." 1.135.1 Mufīd, Jamal 144; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:251; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istīʿāb 2:499, 767; Muʾaddib 110; ʿIzz
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Usd 2:60--61; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al- Athīr
s.v. "N-Ṣ-F." 1.135.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:162; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "ʿ-W-Dh." 1.136.1 Muʾaddib 554; Āmidī 296; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:290.
1.136.2--3 None 1.137 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:236--237. 1.138 Muʾaddib 179;
Āmidī 135, 359. 1.139 Thaqafī 1:188; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 236; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr
158. 1.140 Minqarī 235; Thaqafī 1:76; Kulaynī 4:32, 5:39; Ḥarrānī 186;
Ṭūsī, Amālī 195. 1.141.1 None 1.141.2 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "B-Ṭ-N." 1.142.1 Ṭabarī-Āmūlī, Dalāʾil al-imāmah 20; Ibn
al-Maghāzilī 78. 1.142.2 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "T-Y-R." 1.143.1
Qālī, Amālī 2:54, 100 (attrib. ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz); Ḥarrānī 98, 299
(attrib. Muḥammad al-Bāqir); Mufīd, Irshād 1:238; Hārūnī 261; Ṭūsī,
Amālī 216; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:48; Warrām 2:186; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah
9:311. 1.143.2 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 282; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "M-H-Y-ʿ"; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:341. 1.144 Ibn Aʿtham 1:291; Abū
Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 134; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:124; Mufīd, Irshād 1:209; Ibn
Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:122. 1.145.1 Kulaynī 8:386; Ḥarrānī 227. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 878 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.145.2--3 Kulaynī 8:388, 391. 1.146 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Ḍ-B-B"; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 1:78 (cites Abū Mikhnaf). 1.147 Ibn Abī
al-Dunyā, Maqtal 55; Kulaynī 1:299; Qummī 2:367; Masʿūdī, Ith- bāt 103;
Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:418; Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 1:96; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ 108;
Hārūnī 269--270; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Kh-L-W"; Ibn ʿAsākir
42:562. 1.148.1 Muʾaddib 521. 1.148.2 None 1.148.3 Ṭabarī-Āmulī 401.
1.149.1, 4 None 1.149.2 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:170. 1.149.3 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
1:169. 150.1 Kulaynī 1:139; Āmidī 232; Warrām 1:549. 150.2 Karājikī,
Kanz 114; Muʾaddib 179, 366. 151.1 Kulaynī 5:86; Ḥarrānī 154; Muʾaddib
513. 151.2 Ḥarrānī 154; Muʾaddib 77. 151.3 Ḥarrānī 154; Muʾaddib 49,
142. 152.1 Muʾaddib 498; Āmidī 324. 152.2 Muʾaddib 155, 359, 401; Āmidī
331, 252; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:113. 153.1 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:170. 153.2 None
1.154.1 Māmaṭīrī 223; Ṭūsī, Talkhīṣ1/2:274--275; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:247.
1.154.2 Sulaym 2:180; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 261; Thaqafī 1:140; Kulaynī 2:50;
Ḥarrānī 164; Furāt 615; Māmaṭīrī 225; Mufīd, Amālī 277; Ṭūsī, Amālī 37.
1.154.3 Warrām 2:394. 1.154.4 Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 11:295; Māmaṭīrī
230. 1.155.1 Ḥarrānī 223; Māmaṭīrī 233; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Sh-W-L," "R-B- K." 1.155.2 Māmaṭīrī 233--235; Āmidī 97; Muʾaddib
202. 1.156.1 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:340 (attrib. Prophet); Kulaynī 1:60;
Qummī 1:2; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-Dh-R." 1.156.2 Qummī 1:384;
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "M-Q-R," "N-Kh-M." 1.157 None 1.158.1
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 257; Qummī 2:138; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:167. 1.158.2 Ṭabrisī,
Makārim 8. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 879 (cont.) Text no. References
1.158.3 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:342; Ṭabrisī, Makārim 9; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 50;
Ghaz- ālī, Iḥyāʾ 3:212--213. 1.158.4 Ṣadūq, Amālī 718; Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 5:342--343; Ṭabrisī, Makārim 9; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:370. 1.159 None
1.160 Māmaṭīrī 427; Ṣadūq, Amālī 716--717; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:146; Ābī
1:287; Khaz- zāz 213; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 371; Mufīd, Irshād 1:294; Murtaḍā,
Fuṣūl 77; Samʿānī, Tafsīr 2:455; Ibn Shahrāshūb 3:15; Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "W-Ḍ-N." 1.161.1 Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 78--79; Abū Nuʿaym 1:72;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:326. 1.161.2 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:327; Warrām
1:233. 1.162.1 Balādhurī 2:549 (§1411); Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:337; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 5:58; Mufīd, Jamal 100; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "S-F-Ḥ";
Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "S-F-Ḥ." 1.162.2 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:337; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
5:58. 1.162.3 ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:539. 1.163 Peacock
Oration 1.163.1 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "D-W-R," "ʿ-N-J,"
"-Q-L-ʿ," "N-W-T." 1.163.2 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-R-R."
1.163.3 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:239; Warrām 1:226; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "ʿ-S-L-J." 1.164.1 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Q-Y-Ḍ." 1.164.2
Kulaynī 8:65. 1.164.3 Mufīd, Irshād 1:290. 1.165 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:436;
ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:557; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:254;
Qalqashandī 1:258. 1.166 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:437; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr,
Kāmil 2:558. 1.167 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:445. 1.168 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:491;
Mufīd, Jamal 156 (cites Wāqidī); Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:80. 1.169 Minqarī
232; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:14--15; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Muhaj 133 (cites Ahwāzī); Ibn
Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:291. 1.170.1 None 1.170.2 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:176;
Thaqafī 1:308; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 416; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:19. 1.170.3 Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:176; Thaqafī 1:308; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 416; Mufīd, Jamal
92. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 880 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.170.4 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:176; Māmaṭīrī 228. 1.171.1 ʿImād al-Dīn
al-Ṭabarī 3. 1.171.2 Minqarī 10; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 153; Nuʿmān,
Sharḥ1:369; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:222. 1.171.3 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 111; Ḥarrānī
184. 1.172 Kulaynī 5:53; Ṭūsī, Amālī 169; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 184;
Muʾaddib 406; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "J-L-B," "Dh-M-R," "N-Ṣ-F,"
"H-B-L"; Ibn Ṭal- ḥah 213. 1.173 Āmidī 191. 1.174.1 Muʾaddib 151.
1.174.2 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:258; Muʾaddib 143. 1.174.3 Muʾaddib 152.
1.174.4, 6 None 1.174.5 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:130; Muʾaddib 511. 1.174.7
Muʾaddib 513. 1.174.8 Barqī 1:7; Ḥarrānī 293; Qummī 2:70; Kulaynī 2:331,
443; ʿAyyāshī 2:352 (attrib. Muḥammad al-Bāqir); Ṣadūq, Amālī 325--326
(attrib. Jaʿfar al- Ṣādiq); Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 118--119 (attrib. Jaʿfar
al-Ṣādiq); Muʾaddib 109; Fattāl 466 (attrib. Muḥammad al-Bāqir). 1.174.9
Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 159; Quḍāʿī, Shihāb §3.35 (attrib. Prophet). 1.175
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:85. 1.176.1 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʿ-Q-L."
1.176.2 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:157; Ḥarrānī 114; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 624; Karājikī,
Kanz 271; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:463. 1.177 Kulaynī 1:98, 138; Ṣadūq,
Amālī 423; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 109, 205, 308; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ236; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:225; Muʾaddib 543; Sibṭ157. 1.178 Thaqafī 1:291; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh
5:107; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "T-R-K." 1.179 Thaqafī 1:336;
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:115. 1.180 Nawf al-Bikālī transmitter (Raḍī names him).
1.180.1, 4--5 None 1.180.2 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "D-H-M."
1.180.3 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "R-J-Ḥ." 1.180.6 Muʾaddib 107;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:192. 1.180.7 Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:373. 1.181.1--2 None
1.181.3 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:163; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Y-F-N."
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 881 (cont.) Text no. References 1.182
Abū Hilāl, Ṣināʿatayn 277. 1.183.1 Hārūnī 273, 282; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj
1:305. 1.183.2 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:444; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:305.
1.183.3--4 Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:306. 1.184.1 Kulaynī 1:138; Ḥarrānī 64;
Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 2:136--137; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 35, 37, 38, 40, 308; Mufīd, Amālī
254, 256; Ṭūsī, Amālī 22; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:177, 219, 299. 1.184.2--4
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:302--303. 1.184.5 Thaqafī 1:173--174; Ḥarrānī 63.
1.185 Muʾaddib 526, 566; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:90; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:49
(cites Madāʾinī). 1.186 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 111; Ḥarrānī 184; Thaʿālibī,
Iʿjāz 40--41; Muʾaddib 360; War- rām 1:230. 1.187 Sulaym 2:256; ʿAyyāshī
2:305; Ṣaffār 48--49 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq), 497; Ṣadūq, Amālī 196,
423--425; Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 41--42; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ236; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn
1:73; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī vol. 1 majlis 45, vol. 4 majlis 56; Muʾaddib
360; Āmidī 80, 140; Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 378; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Yaqīn 489. 1.188
Muʾaddib 158, 349, 474; Āmidī 50, 108; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 3:220 (cites Ibn
Nubātah). 1.189 Muʾaddib 153, 518; Āmidī 87, 180, 245. 1.190 Qāṣiʿah
Oration 1.190.1 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:332; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Yaqīn 414, 504.
1.190.2 Thaqafī 2:396; Muʾaddib 104. 1.190.3 Muʾaddib 521. 1.190.4
Kulaynī 4:198; Muʾaddib 88. 1.190.5 Kulaynī 4:199; Iskāfī, Tamḥīṣ5;
Muʾaddib 19, 358. 1.190.6, 9--10 None 1.190.7--8 Muʾaddib 204, 200.
1.190.11 Ṭūsī, Talkhīṣ1/2:264 1.190.12 Māwardī, Aʿlām 144; Muʾaddib 167;
Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:28. 1.191 Oration to Hammām Sulaym 2:371--375; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:380--381; Kulaynī 2:226; Iskāfī, Tamḥīṣ70--73; Ḥarrānī
159--162; Māmaṭīrī 425--427; Ṣadūq, Amālī 665-- 669; Ṣadūq, Ṣifāt 61;
Ḥarrānī 159--161; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 71--72, 532--534; al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 882
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References Abū Nuʿaym 1:76 (attrib. ʿAlī), 2:151 (attrib. al-Ḥasan
al-Baṣrī); Karājikī, Kanz 31--33; Fattāl 439; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:493; Warrām
2:254; Ibn Ṭalḥah 269--271; Qurṭubī 18:94; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:6--7.
1.192 Muʾaddib 498; Āmidī 54, 269; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:160. 1.193 None
1.194 Muwaffaq biʾllāh 534; Muʾaddib 109, 146, 556; Āmidī 87. 1.195
Minqarī 224; Ṣadūq, Man 4:420; Mufīd, Amālī 234--235; Mufīd, Kāfiyah 24;
Ṭūsī, Amālī 10--11; Muʾaddib 506; Āmidī 243. 1.196.1--2 Majd al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr s.v. "A-W-R," "N-W-N"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "A-W-R," "N-W-N."
1.196.3--4 None 1.197 Kulaynī 5:36--38. 1.198 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 166;
Kulaynī 2:336, 338; Nuʿmān, Manāqib 267. 1.199 Barqī 1:262; Thaqafī
2:584; Ibn Abī Zaynab 37; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 407; Mufīd, Irshād 1:276; Mufīd,
Amālī 137; Ibn Abī Zaynab, Ghaybah 1:33. 1.200 Kulaynī 1:458; Mufīd,
Amālī 281; Ṭūsī, Amālī 109; Fattāl 152; Irbilī 2:147; Ibn Shahrāshūb
3:139; Sibṭ319. 1.201 Ṣadūq, Amālī 172; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 2:267; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:295--296; Fattāl 442; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 468; Muʾaddib 147;
Warrām 66; Sibṭ132. 1.202 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 270; Māmaṭīrī 236, 420; Ṣadūq,
Amālī 587; Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 2:63; Mufīd, Amālī 198--199; Mufīd, Irshād
1:234; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ98; Ābī 1:213; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 104; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt
524. 1.203 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 114; Ṭūsī, Amālī 732. 1.204 Minqarī 103;
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 137; Abū Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 165; Sibṭ154. 1.205 Minqarī
530; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 151; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:61, 7:169 (attrib. ʿAbdallāh
ibn Ḥasan). 1.206 Ibn Aʿtham 3:186; Minqarī 484; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 175; Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:139; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:387. 1.207.1 Iskāfī, Miʿyār
243; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:214; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:277; Rāwandī, Daʿawāt
230. 1.207.2 Kulaynī 1:410; Māmaṭīrī 384; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 7:250. 1.208
Sulaym 2:181; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 301--302; Kulaynī 1:62, 2:62; Ḥarrānī 193;
Ibn Abī Zaynab 76; Māmaṭīrī 229; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 255; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 231;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:393; Sibṭ142. 1.209 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:98; Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "ʾ-Z-R." 1.210 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 279. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 883 (cont.) Text no. References 1.211
None 1.212 Muʾaddib 313; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 192. 1.213 None 1.214.1--2
Kulaynī 8:352--355. 1.215.1 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:134; Thaqafī 1:308,
2:570; Mufīd, Jamal 92; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 416; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:48; Ibn
Ṭāwūs, Kashf 180. 1.215.2 Thaqafī 1:311. 1.216 Balādhurī 2:261;
Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:174; Abū al-Faraj, Aghānī 18:331; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
5:70; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 371; Māmaṭīrī 391; Samʿānī, Tafsīr 3:186; Ibn
ʿAsākir 25:114; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "T-L-ʿ"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "T-L-ʿ." 1.217 Muʾaddib 366; Āmidī 233. 1.218.1 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
2:45; Muhallabī 1:141. 1.218.2, 4 None 1.218.3 Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "S-M-J." 1.219.1 Muʾaddib 157; Āmidī 81; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "W-Q-R"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "W-Q-R." 1.219.2 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:159.
1.220.1 Muʾaddib 203, 392, 483; Āmidī 232; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:143.
1.220.2 Muʾaddib 203. 1.221.1 Kulaynī 5:39; Muʾaddib 506; Ṣadūq, Amālī
719; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:319; Ibn Ḥamdūn 1:97; Warrām 1:197; Sibṭ155.
1.221.2 Nuʿmān, Sharḥ3:241; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:376--377; Warrām 1:157.
1.221.3 Ṣadūq, Amālī 722; Warrām 1:197. 1.222 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:374;
Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 133; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:65. 1.223 Abū Bakr
al-Dīnawarī 5:281; Abū Nuʿaym 6:206 (attrib. Faḍl ibn ʿĪsā al-
Raqqāshī); Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 46; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 3:212--213; Muʾaddib 91,
251; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 370; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:500; Ibn al-Jawzī, Ṣifat
1:121; Sibṭ122; Nuwayrī 5:253; Suyūṭī 18:103. 1.224 Ṭūsī,
Miṣbāḥ355--356. 1.225 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:218; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "ʿ-M-D"; Ibn Manẓūr, s.v. "ʿ-M-D." 1.226 Mufīd, Jamal 144 (cites
Wāqidī); Ṭabarī-Āmulī 418; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:236; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 181;
Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "H-D-J." 1.227.1 Thaqafī 2:238--239; Muʾaddib 154, 318;
Āmidī 112, 113, 148; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-D-M," "Kh-L-S,"
"D-J-Y," "ʿ-B-L"; Sibṭ131--132. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 884 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
1.227.2 Muʾaddib 146, 334; Āmidī 213. 1.227.3 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:145.
1.228 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:162; Mufīd, Jamal 143--144; Mufīd, Irshād 1:244;
Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:236; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 1:102 (cites Abū Mikhnaf).
1.229 Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:377; Āmidī 69. 1.230 Muʾaddib 108, 173; Āmidī 82,
132; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:80; Warrām 1:251, 2:74. 1.231 Dhiʿlib
al-Yamānī, transmitter, through Aḥmad ibn Qutaybah, through ʿAbdallāh
ibn Mālik ibn Dajnah (Raḍī names them). Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:326. 1.232
Zajjājī 174; Mufīd, Amālī 103; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd 2:162; Ibn Abī
al- Ḥadīd 3:194 (cites Muḥammad ibn Ḥabīb). Additional Orations: 1.233
Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "W-Ṭ-ʾ"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "W-Ṭ-ʾ." 1.234
Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:135; Thaqafī 1:312. 1.235 Kulaynī 8:386; Ḥarrānī
227; Muʾaddib 514. 1.236 Āmidī 54; Muʾaddib 91. 1.237 Āmidī 308, 346.
1.238 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:59. Chapter 2: Letters Text no. References 2.1
Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:86; Mufīd, Jamal 131--132; Ṭūsī, Amālī 718;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:372; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:337. 2.2 Mufīd, Jamal
215--216 (cites Wāqidī); Mufīd, Kāfiyah 28. 2.3 Māmaṭīrī 350--352;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 388; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 557--558; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 154; Fattāl
446; Sibṭ149; Zarandī 169--171. 2.4 Sibṭ66, 129, 157. 2.5 Minqarī 20;
Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:111; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:78. 2.6 Sulaym 2:305; Ibn
Aʿtham 2:506, 4:494; Minqarī 29; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:121; Abū Ḥanīfah
al-Dīnawarī 163; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:80. 2.7 Ibn Aʿtham 2:534; Minqarī
57--58; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:122; al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix
of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 885 (cont.) Text no.
References Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:261; Māmaṭīrī 302; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 614;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 204. 2.8 Ibn Aʿtham 2:516; Minqarī 55; Ibn Qutaybah,
Imāmah 1:116; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:80. 2.9 Minqarī 85; Balādhurī 2:281; Abū
Ḥanīfah al-Dīnawarī 163; Ibn ʿAbd Rab- bih 5:84; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 252.
2.10 Ibn Aʿtham 2:536; Minqarī 109; Ibn ʿAsākir 59:133; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
1:116, 1:171, 2:153. 2.11 Minqarī 123; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 142; Abū Ḥanīfah
al-Dīnawarī 166; Ḥarrānī 191; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "K-F-F"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "K-F-F." 2.12 Minqarī 148--149; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:100
(§34499); Muwaffaq Khwāraz- mī 368; Muʾaddib 82. 2.13 Minqarī 154;
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:567. 2.14 Ibn Aʿtham 3:32; Minqarī 203; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh
4:492, 5:10--11; Kulaynī 5:38; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:359. 2.15 Minqarī 230,
477; Mufīd, Jamal 182. 2.16 Minqarī 215; Kulaynī 5:41; Nuʿmān,
Sharḥ2:155, 531; Muʾaddib 505, 530. 2.17 Sulaym 2:337; Ibn Aʿtham
3:154--155; Minqarī 150, 471; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:104; Abū Ḥanīfah
al-Dīnawarī 187; Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:23; Māmaṭīrī 259; Karājikī, Kanz 201;
Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 53; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 256; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:361. 2.18
Māmaṭīrī 352--353; Bāqillānī 68; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:114, 210, 416. 2.19
Balādhurī 2:161; Yaʿqūbī 2:203; Māmaṭīrī 258. 2.20 Balādhurī 2:162;
Yaʿqūbī 2:204; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 449; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:197. 2.21
Balādhurī 2:164--165; Muʾaddib 359. 2.22 Minqarī 107; Balādhurī
2:116--117; Yaʿqūbī 2:205; Thaʿlab 155; Kulaynī 8:240; Ibn Durayd, Amālī
149; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:84; Naḥḥās 377; Ḥarrānī 200; Qālī, Amālī 2:94;
Māmaṭīrī 220; Makkī 1:138; Bāqillānī 146; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ95; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 106; Muʾaddib 155, 525; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 2:416; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ
4:402; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:503; Ḍiyāʾ Ibn al-Athīr 1:275; Sibṭ150; Ibn Ṭalḥah
272; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 374; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:192. 2.23 Ibn Abī
al-Dunyā, Maqtal 56; Kulaynī 1:299; Masʿūdī, Ithbāt 103; Masʿūdī, Murūj
2:418; Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 1:96; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ108; Ibn ʿAsākir
42:562. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 886 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
2.24 Ibn Shabbah 1:226; Kulaynī 7:49--52; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 2:342; Ṭūsī,
Tahd- hīb 9:148. 2.25.1 Thaqafī 1:125; Kulaynī 3:536; Mufīd, Muqniʿah
255; Thaʿālibī, Shakwā 115; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:395; Quṭb al-Dīn
Rāwandī, Fiqh 1:235. 2.25.2 Mufīd, Muqniʿah 255; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī,
Fiqh 1:235, 2.25.3 Thaqafī 1:129--130; Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb 4:97. 2.26.1
Muʾaddib 440. 2.26.2 Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:252. 2.27.1 Ḥarrānī 177; Māmaṭīrī
268; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 562; Warrām 1:80. 2.27.2 Thaqafī 1:235; Māmaṭīrī
269; Mufīd, Amālī 263; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 563-- 564; Ṭūsī, Amālī 26;
Warrām 1:80. 2.27.3 Thaqafī 2:238--239; Māmaṭīrī 270--271; Mufīd, Amālī
266; Hārūnī 265; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 564--565; Ibn Ḥamdūn 1:81; Ṭūsī, Amālī
29; Muʾaddib 174. 2.27.4 Māmaṭīrī 275; Mufīd, Amālī 266; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 568; Ṭūsī, Amālī 29. 2.27.5 Thaqafī 1:248; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 570.
2.28.1 Ibn Aʿtham 2:560; Nuwayrī 7:233. 2.28.2 Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj
1:258--259; Nuwayrī 7:233; Qalqashandī 1:275. 2.28.3 Abū al-Ṣalāḥ23;
Nuwayrī 7:236; Qalqashandī 1:276. 2.28.4 Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:262; Nuwayrī
7:236; Qalqashandī 1:276. 2.28.5 Ibn Aʿtham 2:561; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:351;
Nuwayrī 7:236; Qalqashandī 1:276--277. 2.29 Thaqafī 2:403. 2.30
Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:66. 2.31 Testament of Counsel for al-Ḥasan 2.31.1 Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 3:100; Ḥarrānī 68; Māmaṭīrī 201; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ118; Hārūnī
130; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 540; Muʾaddib 505; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 159 (cites
Kulaynī and Abū Hilāl). 2.31.2 Ḥarrānī 68; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:100;
Māmaṭīrī 201--202; Hārūnī 130--131; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 541; Ibn Ṭāwūs,
Kashf 160. 2.31.3 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:100; Ḥarrānī 69; Māmaṭīrī 202--203;
Hārūnī 131; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 541; Muʾaddib 79; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 160.
2.31.4 Ḥulwānī 58; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:166; Ḥarrānī 70; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ116;
Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 161. 2.31.5--6 Ḥarrānī 70--71; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf
161--162. 2.31.7 Ḥarrānī 72. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 887 (cont.) Text no. References 2.31.8
Ḥarrānī 71. 2.31.9 Ḥarrānī 72; Muʾaddib 416. 2.31.10 Ḥarrānī 73; Ibn
Ṭāwūs, Kashf 163. 2.31.11 Ḥarrānī 74; Māmaṭīrī 211; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 22;
Muʾaddib 79, 136. 2.31.12 Ḥarrānī 74; Ṣadūq, Man 4:389; Māmaṭīrī 203;
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ116; Hārūnī 131; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 542--543; Muʾaddib 137,
331; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 238; Ibn ʿAṭiyyah 5:12 (attrib.
Prophet); Gharnāṭī 9:300 (attrib. Prophet). 2.31.13 Māmaṭīrī 203--204;
Hārūnī 133; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 543; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 165. 2.31.14 Ḥarrānī
76; Māmaṭīrī 204; Hārūnī 133; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 544; Warrām 2:346; Ibn
Ṭāwūs, Kashf 165. 2.31.15 Ḥarrānī 76; Māmaṭīrī 204; Hārūnī 133; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 544--545; Muʾaddib 155; Warrām 1:246; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 166.
2.31.16 Ḥarrānī 77; Māmaṭīrī 204; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 545--546; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 26; Muʾaddib 80, 171, 526; Ibn ʿAsākir 66:347; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf
166. 2.31.17 Ḥulwānī 59; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 226, 228; ʿIjlī 2:43 (attrib.
anon., quoted by Ibn al-ʿAbbās); Kulaynī 8:24; Ḥarrānī 79; Māmaṭīrī 205;
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ 117; Hārūnī 132; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 546--547; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 8, 12, 18, 22, 32, 38, 76, 86; Muʾaddib 30, 34, 50, 59, 69, 95,
96, 136, 143, 191, 193, 233, 275, 284, 285, 369, 323, 402, 472, 486,
538; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 167, 172. 2.31.18 Ḥulwānī 59; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
3:160; Ḥarrānī 81, 205; Māmaṭīrī 205-- 206; Ṣadūq, Man 4:390, 392; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ117; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 548; Karājikī, Kanz 34, 57; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr
83, 85; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 188 (attrib. Mūsā Kāẓim); Muʾaddib 79, 162,
242, 419, 524, 525, 526; Ibn ʿAsākir 29:180 (attrib. ʿAbdallāh ibn
Ṣāliḥ, governor of the fron- tier towns under Rashīd); Warrām 1:187,
2:348; Ibn Ṭalḥah 276; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 167, 169; Dhahabī, Tārīkh 12:210
(attrib. ʿAbdallāh ibn Ṣāliḥ). 2.31.19 Ḥulwānī 59; Kulaynī 8:24; Ḥarrānī
83, 86, 98; Māmaṭīrī 206; Makkī 2:26; Ṣadūq, Hidāyah 314; Ṣadūq, Man
4:386, 390, 391; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 372; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ117; al-Hārūnī
131--132; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 548--550; Karā- jikī, Kanz 88, 283; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 8, 9, 20--22, 30, 31, 34, 40; Muʾaddib 45, 50, 69, 79, 84, 115,
266, 284, 367, 372, 441, 444, 462; 525, 555; Warrām 2:349; Ibn Ṭāwūs,
Kashf 169. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 888 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
2.31.20 Ḥulwānī 60; Kulaynī 5:338, 510; Ḥarrānī 86; Muwaffaq biʾllāh
550; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 86; Muʾaddib 100; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf 171; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "ʾ-F-N." 2.31.21 Ḥarrānī 87; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 550; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf
173. 2.31.22 Ḥarrānī 88; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 551. 2.32 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 138.
2.33 Thaqafī 2:509; Ibn Aʿtham 4:222. 2.34 Balādhurī 2:400; Thaqafī
1:269, 2:368; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:96--97; Māmaṭīrī 286; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
2:154. 2.35 Thaqafī 1:299; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:109; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn
al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:710. 2.36 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 180; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah
1:75; Thaqafī 2:432; Abū al- Faraj, Aghānī 16:289; Māmaṭīrī 296--297;
Hārūnī 104--105. 2.37 Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:264 2.38 Thaqafī 1:267--269;
Yaʿqūbī 2:194; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:96; Māmaṭīrī 283; Mufīd, Amālī 81;
Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ80; Najāshī 203; Ibn ʿAsākir 56:390. 2.39 Ṭabrisī,
Iḥtijāj 1:267--268; Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 4:61 (cites Minqarī). 2.40
Balādhurī 2:170; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:103. 2.41 Balādhurī 2:174; Ibn
Qutaybah, Gharīb 1:376; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:94; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 5:106;
Māmaṭīrī 299; Kashshī 58; Maydānī 2:101; Sibṭ151. 2.42 Balādhurī 2:158;
Yaʿqūbī 2:201. 2.43 Balādhurī 2:170; Yaʿqūbī 2:201. 2.44 Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 4:281. 2.45.1--2 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:241; Warrām 2:506. 2.45.3
None 2.45.4 Ṣadūq, Amālī 604; Fattāl 127; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:355. 2.45.5
Warrām 2:172; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī vol. 4 majlis 99. 2.46 Balādhurī
2:398; Thaqafī 1:257--258; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:95; Māmaṭīrī 282; Mufīd,
Amālī 80. 2.47.1 Sulaym 2:446; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 245; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:147;
Kulaynī 7:51; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:447; Ḥarrānī 198; Zajjājī 112; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:408; Abū al-Faraj, Maqātil 51--52; Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 1:101;
Māmaṭīrī 375; Ṣadūq, Man 4:190; Hārūnī 126, 128--129; Muwaffaq biʾllāh
315--316, 5 572 - 73; Fattāl 136; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 384; ʿIzz al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:741. 2.47.2 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 246; Kulaynī 7:51;
Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:449; Ḥarrānī 198; Abū al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix
of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 889 (cont.) Text no.
References al-Faraj, Maqātil 48; Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 1:101; Ṣadūq,
Man 4:191; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 386; Fattāl 136; Ibn Shahrāshūb 3:95; ʿIzz
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:740. 2.48 Ibn Aʿtham 3:191; Minqarī 493.
2.49 Ibn Aʿtham 3:192; Minqarī 110, 498; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 103; Abū Ḥanīfah
al- Dīnawarī 163, 191; Warrām 2:172. 2.50 Minqarī 107; Iskāfī, Miʿyār
103; Ṭūsī, Amālī 217. 2.51 Minqarī 108, 132; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 122. 2.52
Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 42. 2.53 The Testament of Ashtar Ḥarrānī 126--148;
Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:353--367 (attrib. either ʿAlī or Prophet, Ashtar not
mentioned; omits §2.53.15--19, 21--24); Ibn Ḥamdūn 1:316--327; Nuwayrī
6:19--32; and: 2.53.3 as in §2.53 above, and Muʾaddib 137. 2.53.5 as in
§2.53 above, Warrām 1:215, 2:125; and Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Gh-B-Y." 2.53.7
as in §2.53 above, and Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 166. 2.53.16--18 as in §2.53
above, and Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ122, 123. 2.53.17 as in §2.53 above, and Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ122; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:516; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:8. 2.54 Ibn
Aʿtham 2:465; Iskāfī, Maqāmāt, lost (Raḍī's stated source); Ibn
Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:66; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:154. 2.55 Ibn Aʿtham 4:225;
Iskāfī, Miʿyār 137--138; Āmidī 56, 119; Muʾaddib 148; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
2:153. 2.56 Minqarī 121; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 140; Ḥarrānī 191; Muʾaddib 393.
2.57 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:500. 2.58 None 2.59 Minqarī 106; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
1:89. 2.60 Minqarī 125; Māmaṭīrī 298; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 613; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al- Athīr s.v. "Sh-Dh-Y"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Sh-Dh-Y." 2.61 Balādhurī
2:473; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:89. 2.62.1 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:133; Thaqafī
1:303--305; Ṭabarī-Āmulī 411. 2.62.2 None 2.63 None 2.64 Ibn Aʿtham
2:506; Minqarī 29; Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:100--101; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj
1:263--264; Ibn ʿAsākir 59:128. 2.65 None al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 890
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References 2.66 This epistle is similar to epistle §2.22. See sources
there. 2.67 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:132; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Fiqh 1:327. 2.68
Ḥulwānī 55; Kulaynī 2:136; Ḥarrānī 396; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ101; Hārūnī 506;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 537; Mufīd, Irshād 1:233; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 46; Ghazālī,
Iḥyāʾ 3:212--213; Fattāl 441; Warrām 2:562. 2.69 Muʾaddib 84, 85, 96,
98, 99 203, 504, 528. 2.70 Balādhurī 2:157; Yaʿqūbī 2:203; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ113. 2.71 Balādhurī 2:163; Yaʿqūbī 2:203--204. 2.72 Karājikī,
Kanz 16; Muʾaddib 21. 2.73 Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:154. 2.74 Ibn al-Kalbī's
transcribed document, lost (Raḍī's stated source). 2.75 Wāqidī, Jamal,
lost (Raḍī's stated source). 2.76 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:105; Mufīd,
Jamal 223--224; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:153; Warrām 2:171. 2.77 Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-M-M." 2.78 Saʿīd ibn Yaḥyā al-Umawī, Maghāzī, from
his father, after Ibn Isḥāq, lost (Raḍī's stated source). Additional
Letter 2.79 Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Bahjah 583. Chapter 3: Sayings Text no.
References 3.1 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:97 (attrib. Ḥudhayfah \[ibn al-Yamān?\]);
Tawḥīdī, Imtāʿ 179; Āmidī 246. 3.2 Ḥarrānī 201--202; Ḥuṣrī 1:80;
Muʾaddib 449; Warrām 1:128. 3.3 Muʾaddib 88; Āmidī 70. 3.4 Masʿūdī
3:416; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 29; Āmidī 142. 3.5 Ṣadūq, Man 4:387; Ṭūsī, Amālī
595; Muʾaddib 242; Sibṭ142. 3.6 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 232; Māmaṭīrī 212; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 535; Ḥuṣrī 1:81; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:282; Ibn Munqidh 335;
Nuwayrī 3:258. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 891 (cont.) Text no. References 3.7
Qālī, Dhayl 110. 3.8 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 52; Minqarī 449 (attrib. al-Nuʿmān
ibn Bashīr); Ibn Qutay- bah, Imāmah 1:130 (attrib. al-Nuʿmān ibn
Bashīr); Muʾaddib 243; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istīʿāb 2:610, 3:1121. 3.9
Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 232; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 26; Fattāl 483; Āmidī 141; Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 5:276; Ibn al-ʿArabī 1:318. 3.10 Maydānī 2:318, 453. 3.11 Mufīd,
Jamal 46 (cites Abū Mikhnaf); Muʾaddib 476; Āmidī 307. 3.12 Ḥarrānī 223;
Mufīd, Irshād 1:302; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 16; Muʾaddib 202. 3.13 Ibn
al-Muʿtazz 77; Ḥarrānī 13; Bāqillānī 68, 91; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:419.
3.14 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 232; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 34; Muʾaddib 436; Fattāl 490. 3.15
Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:518 (attrib. Prophet); Bayhaqī, Sunan 8:279, 465,
579, 580 (attrib. Prophet); Muʾaddib 87; Āmidī 70. 3.16 Ḥulwānī 42; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:148; Balādhurī 2:115; Ibn ʿAbd Rab- bih 1:42, 90,
2:254; Qālī, Amālī 2:94; Māmaṭīrī 325; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 16; Ibn ʿAbd
al-Barr, Jāmiʿ 1:383; Ḥarrānī 201; Muʾaddib 371; Ibn ʿAsākir 51:264.
3.17 Ibn Aʿtham 2:332; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb al-ḥadīth 1:138; Ṭabarī,
Tārīkh 4:236; Māmaṭīrī 327; Azharī s.v. "ʿ-J-Z"; Harawī s.v. "ʿ-J-Z";
Muʾaddib 42; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "ʿ-J-Z"; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:431; Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al- Athīr s.v. "ʿ-J-Z." 3.18 Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 2:252
(attrib. Prophet); Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:148 (attrib. Prophet); Āmidī 272;
Rāzī, Mafātīḥ3:573 (attrib. Prophet). 3.19 Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 1:117;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 29; Muʾaddib 469; Warrām 1:235; Sibṭ132. 3.20 Muʾaddib
550; Fattāl 473; Āmidī 139; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 4:55; Sibṭ132; Dha- habī,
Tārīkh 8:443. 3.21 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 323; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 26, 222; Khaṭīb,
Tārīkh 11:246 (attrib. Abbasid caliph Manṣūr); Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 10:76
(attrib. Abbasid caliph Manṣūr). 3.22 Muʾaddib 75; Āmidī 62. 3.23
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 20; Muʾaddib 119; Sibṭ136. 3.24 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 22;
Muʾaddib 132; Fattāl 490; Āmidī 142; Sibṭ132. 3.25 Fattāl 490. 3.26
Sulaym 2:176; ʿAdanī 118; Thaqafī 1:135--138; Yaʿqūbī 2:207; Ḥarrānī
126; Kulaynī 2:50, 391; Māmaṭīrī 198--199, 225--227; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 48
(attrib. Prophet), 71; Makkī 1:418; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 231; Mufīd, Amālī 275;
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 892 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
Abū Nuʿaym 1:74; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 134; Fattāl 43; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 43, 84;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 372; Ibn ʿAsākir 3:288; Suyūṭī (after Ibn Abī al-
Dunyā and others), Jamʿ 17:616--619, 18:109--110, 213--214, 385. 3.27
Ḥarrānī 57; Muʾaddib 358. 3.28 Muʾaddib 393; Fattāl 384; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 408. 3.29 Kulaynī 8:23; Ḥarrānī 97; Ṣadūq, Man 4:389; Muʾaddib
114. 3.30 Ḥarrānī 97; Muʾaddib 435; Ibn ʿAsākir 24:337; Muḥammad
al-Waṭwāṭ 134; Dhahabī, Siyar 4:93. 3.31 Kulaynī 3:259; Ḥarrānī 211;
Kūfī 81; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 15; Muʾaddib 479; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 377; Maydānī
2:455; Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 236; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 525; Sibṭ132; Warrām 78.
3.32 Minqarī 144. 3.33 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230; Māmaṭīrī 182--183; Hārūnī 563;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 551-- 552; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 86; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:405;
Ibn ʿAsākir 42:561. 3.34 Muʾaddib 533; Āmidī 345; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 3:53.
3.35 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230, 232; Muʾaddib 419; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 377. 3.36
Minqarī 529; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 193; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:60; ʿAyyāshī 2:104;
Abū Hilāl, Furūq 18; Ṭūsī, Amālī 602; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil
2:674. 3.37 Minqarī 530; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:61; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:195;
Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam kabīr 4:56. 3.38 Thaqafī 1:43; Kulaynī, Kāfī 8:268;
Furāt 482; ʿImād al-Dīn al-Ṭabarī 130, 172; Ṭūsī, Amālī 206; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 151; Fattāl 295. 3.39 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:167 (unattrib.);
Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 539; Sibṭ132. 3.40 Āmidī 199, 202, 235; Maydānī 2:455;
Ṭarṭūshī 199; Ibn Ṭalḥah 281. 3.41 Muʾaddib 36; Shahrastānī, Milal
2:140; Nuwayrī 6:82. 3.42 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 3:169 (attrib. Ardashīr); Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 2:200 (attrib. Kisrā). 3.43 Muʾaddib 372; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:397; Ṭarṭūshī 203. 3.44 Muʾaddib 339; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:432. 3.45
Ṣadūq, Amālī 73; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 196; Ṣadūq, Man 4:396; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Adab 117; Muʾaddib 120; Ibn ʿAsākir 16:114 (attrib. Khālid ibn Ṣafwān);
Nuwayrī 3:258. 3.46 Māwardī, Adab 188; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:380; Ibn
ʿAsākir 42:517. 3.47 Fattāl 4; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 437. 3:48 Kulaynī 2:90;
Ḥarrānī 216; Ṣadūq, Man 1:187; Āmidī 51; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 58; Warrām
1:93. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 893 (cont.) Text no. References 3.49
Muʾaddib 28; Fattāl, ʿUyūn 454; Āmidī 33; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 228. 3.50
Ḥarrānī 100; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ152; Fattāl 454 (attrib. Prophet); Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 228 (attrib. ʿAlī), 233 (attrib. Prophet). 3.51 Muʾaddib 25;
Maydānī 2:455; Ibn al-ʿArabī 1:293; Ibn Ṭalḥah 281. 3.52 Muʾaddib 430;
Āmidī 269; Ṭarṭūshī 203. 3.53 Ṣadūq, Man 4:388; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ229;
Muʾaddib 46. 3.54 Ābī 1:222. 3.55 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 224; Muʾaddib 28;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 375 (cites Jāḥiẓ). 3.56 Muʾaddib 71, 127; Ḥuṣrī 3:826
(attrib. Ibn al-Muʿtazz). 3.57 Muʾaddib 358; Maydānī 2:83 (attrib.
anon); Dhahabī, Siyar 4:396 (attrib. ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn); Ibn Kathīr,
Bidāyah 9:132 (attrib. ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn). 3.58 Ḥarrānī 359; Āmidī 228.
3.59 Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 408; Āmidī 234; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:369; Nuwayrī
3:204 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq). 3.60 Ḥarrānī 90; Mufīd, Irshād 1:300;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 14; Muʾaddib 69; Ibn Ṭalḥah 280. 3.61 Muʾaddib 135; Āmidī
140. 3.62 Āmidī 40; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "F-R-Ṭ"; Ibn al-ʿArabī
1:86. 3.63 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 226; Muʾaddib 1:134; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:122;
Maydānī 2:454; Ibn Ṭalḥah 281. 3.64 Muʾaddib 22; Āmidī 42; Sibṭ133. 3.65
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:21. 3.66 Muʾaddib 497; Warrām 2:370. 3.67 Muʾaddib
376; Āmidī 322. 3.68 Sulaym 2:335; Ibn Aʿtham 3:171; Minqarī 476;
Muʾaddib 141. 3.69 Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:391; Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:415; Ṣadūq,
Amālī 724; Kūfī 2:52; Abū Nuʿaym 1:85; Karājikī, Kanz 270; Ḥuṣrī 1:78;
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istīʿāb 3:1108; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī vol. 1 majlis 40;
Muʾaddib 556; Fattāl 441; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 467; Ibn ʿAsākir 24:402;
Warrām 1:253, 2:75; Sibṭ119; Irbilī 1:72. 3.70 Ibn Aʿtham 4:217; Kulaynī
1:155; Ḥarrānī 467; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 380; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 2:127; Mufīd, Irshād
1:225; Karājikī, Kanz 169; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:310. 3.71 Ḥulwānī 42;
Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:285; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 228; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb 1:376; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:148; Ḥarrānī 201; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:116; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 4:77; Qālī, Amālī 1:194 (attrib. Muʿāwiyah); Māmaṭīrī 325--326;
Ṭūsī, Amālī 625; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ94; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 45; al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 894 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
Warrām 1:256; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "L-J-L-J"; Muḥammad al-
Waṭwāṭ57. 3.72 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 1:83, 2:77; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 222; Ibn Qutaybah,
ʿUyūn 2:144; Balād- hurī, Ansāb 2:115; Yaʿqūbī 2:206; Mubarrad, Fāḍil 2;
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:79, 128, 3:14, 4:288; Abū Hilāl, Dīwān 1:146; Māmaṭīrī
151; Ṣadūq, Amālī 532; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 420; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:58; Ḥarrānī
201; Bāqillānī 68; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ95; Mufīd, Irshād 1:300; Thaʿālibī,
Tafsīr 1:533; Muwaf- faq biʾllāh 297; Karājikī, Kanz 147; Fattāl 109;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 375; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:326. 3.73 Ḥulwānī 51; Jāḥiẓ,
Bayān 2:77; Barqī 1:229; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:143; Yaʿqūbī 2:206;
Kulaynī 2:89; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:90, 4:169; Māmaṭīrī 154--157; Nuʿmān,
Daʿāʾim, 1:80; Ḥarrānī 218; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 315; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:48; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ94; Mufīd, Irshād 1:297; Hārūnī 211; Ṭūsī, Tibyān 6:470; Abū
Nuʿaym 1:75; Māwardī, Adab 58; Fattāl 422; Muwaf- faq Khwārazmī 374; Ibn
ʿAsākir 41:198; Sibṭ140. 3.74 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:77, 200; Ibn Qutaybah,
ʿUyūn 1:396; Balādhurī 2:188; ʿAlī al-Ḥimyarī 64; Māmaṭīrī 244; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 587; Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:274; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:453; Maydānī
1:53; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ2:364. Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ57; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:7;
Ibn Rifāʿah 1:70. 3.75 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:316; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:201;
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 1:94, 4:288; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ95; Muʾaddib 196. 3.76 Jāḥiẓ,
Bayān 1:398, 2:90 (attrib. Ibn ʿAbbās); Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:85 (attrib.
Mālik ibn Anas); Makkī 1:172 (attrib. anon. scholar); Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Jāmiʿ 2:838 (attrib. Ibn ʿAbbās). 3.77 Abū ʿUbayd, Amthāl 108; Jāḥiẓ,
Bayān 2:14; Jāḥiẓ, Rasāʾil 1:273; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, 1:59, 2:104, 4:288;
Abū Hilāl, Jamharah 1:502; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ95; Bayhaqī, Sunan 10:193;
Maydānī 1:292; Ibn Rifāʿah 1:140. 3.78 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:401;
Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:240; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:130; Abū Bakr al-Dīnawarī 4:49
(§1207); Māmaṭīrī 395; Ṭūsī, Amālī 88; Muʾaddib 331; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt
2:419; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 1:313; Ṭabrisī, Makārim 313. 3.79 Muḥammad
al-Bāqir, transmitter (Raḍī names him); Fattāl 2:478; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ
4:461; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ15:480 (attrib. Ibn ʿAbbās); Ibn al- ʿArabī 1:279.
3.80 Barqī 1:29; Kulaynī 8:307; Ṣadūq, Amālī 87; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 129;
Ṣadūq, Man 4:396. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 895 (cont.) Text no. References 3:81
Abū Khaythamah 33; Dārimī 1:338; Kulaynī 1:32; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:170;
Ḥarrānī 204; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 226; Māmaṭīrī 156, 398; Makkī 1:370; Ibn Baṭ-
ṭah 16, 27; Abū Nuʿaym 1:77, 7:298; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Jāmiʿ 2:811;
Muʾaddib 55; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 1:32; Ibn Munqidh 293; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:510;
Ibn Ṭalḥah 245; Dhahabī, Tadhkirah 1:15. 3.82 Āmidī 91; Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 4:40. 3.83 Jāḥiẓ, Rasāʾil 289 (attrib. Shaʿbī); Balādhurī 2:135;
Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, ʿAql 71; Kulaynī 1:48; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih, 8:90; Māmaṭīrī
153; Thaʿālibī, Tamthīl 30; Māwardī, Amthāl 1:9; Ḥuṣrī 1:202 (attrib.
Ibn Masʿūd); Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 26; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Adab 107; Ibn ʿAbd
al-Barr, Bahjah 115; Ibn ʿAbd al- Barr, ʿIlm 1:126; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Jāmiʿ 2:984; Muʾaddib 152; Fattāl 414; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:23; Suyūṭī
2:715. 3:84 Ṭūsī, Tafsīr 5:107 (attrib. Ibn Masʿūd); Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ
4:456; Warrām 2:255; Ibn al-Qayyim, Ighāthah 2:160 (attrib. Ibn Masʿūd).
3.85 Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:100 (§34499); Iskāfī, Miʿyār 250; Barqī 1:224;
Ḥar- rānī 174; Māmaṭīrī 185; Dāraquṭnī, Muʾtalif 2:1062; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 617; Makkī 1:357; Abū Nuʿaym 1:75, 212 (attrib. Abū al-Dardāʾ),
10:388; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 38, 158; Āmidī 258; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:155; Ibn
ʿAsākir 47:159 (attrib. Abū al-Dardāʾ); Warrām 1:110, 355, 2:539. 3.86
Muʾaddib 142; Āmidī 90; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:281; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 2:318;
Warrām 1:111. 3.87 Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 2:25; Hārūnī 213; Āmidī 322; Maydānī
2:455; Ibn Ṭalḥah 281; Sibṭ105 (attrib. Ibn ʿAbbās); Warrām 1:111. 3:88
Kulaynī 8:391; Muʾaddib 92; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:53; Fattāl 4; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 437. 3:89 Ḥarrānī 209; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 1:441. 3.90 Sulaym 2:373;
Balādhurī 2:188; Ḥarrānī 160; Ṣadūq, Amālī 668; Māmaṭīrī 244--245;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 587; Mufīd, Ṣifāt 22; Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:198; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ96; Karājikī, Kanz 32; Āmidī 57; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:97; ʿIzz
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Usd 3:217; Ibn Ṭalḥah 264; Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ52.
3.91 Ḥulwānī 50; Yaʿqūbī 2:210; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ96; Muʾaddib 543; Āmidī
57; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:56. 3.92 Yaʿqūbī 2:209; Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:241;
Māmaṭīrī 409; Samarqandī 1:587 (attrib. Prophet); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ96; Ābī
1:277; Muʾaddib 554; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:230; Āmidī 363; Warrām 2:200;
Muʾaddib 144. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 896 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
3.93 Balādhurī 2:129; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 2:159; Ṭabrisī, Makārim 113. 3.94
Ibn Saʿd 3:28; Ḥarrānī 212; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ96; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ1:233; War-
rām 2:143; Ibn Ṭalḥah 183. 3.95 Nawf al-Bikālī, transmitter (Raḍī names
him); Iskāfī, Miʿyār 263; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Tawāḍuʿ 51; Masʿūdī, Murūj
4:195; Māmaṭīrī 346--347; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 337; Kūfī 2:476; Hārūnī 496;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 52; Mufīd, Amālī 133; Abū Nuʿaym 1:79, 6:52; Karājikī,
Kanz 30; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 44; Khaṭīb, Tārīkh 8:42; Āmidī 209; Ibn ʿAsākir
62:305; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:6. 3.96 Mufīd, Amālī 159; Ṭūsī, Amālī
510--511; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ97; Hārūnī 272; Muʾaddib 156; Ibn al-Athīr, Usd
5:155. 3.97 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ97; Āmidī 351. 3.98 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 54; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:247; Āmidī 183. 3.99 Mubarrad, Fāḍil 2; Ḥarrānī 95; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:415; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 1:109; Mufīd, Irshād 1:301; Ḥuṣrī 2:540;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 149; Muʾaddib 420; Āmidī 225; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:513. 3.100
Khalīl 7:442; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:463; Yaʿqūbī 2:210; Ḥarrānī 116;
Māmaṭīrī 154--157 (156); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ98; Muʾaddib 499; ʿImād al- Dīn
al-Ṭabarī 21; Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 187; Rāzī, Maḥṣūl 4:70 (attrib.
Prophet); Qurṭubī 2:154; Ibn al-ʿArabī 1:140. 3.101 ʿAbd al-Razzāq 8:299
(attrib. ʿUmar); Muʾaddib 431; Āmidī 351. 3.102 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb
4:359; Ibn Qutaybah, Iṣlāḥ117; Ṣaffār 410; Māmaṭīrī 237; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī
182; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 588--589; Ahwāzī, Muʾmin 16; Ḥarrānī 343; Mufīd,
Ikhtiṣāṣ311; Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:13; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:379. 3.103 Jāḥiẓ,
Miʾat 224; Barqī 1:17; Kulaynī 8:20; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:115; Ṭabarānī,
Muʿjam kabīr 3:69; Ṣadūq, Amālī 399; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 376 (few lines
attrib. Prophet, speaking to ʿAlī); Ḥarrānī 94; Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 1:11
(attrib. Prophet); Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ246; Muʾaddib 543; Fattāl 4; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 400, 538. 3.104 Muʾaddib 131; Āmidī 143; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
3:297. 3.105 Ṭūsī, Amālī 641; Muʾaddib 384; Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 121. 3.106
Yaʿqūbī 2:206; Ḥarrānī 203; Kulaynī 8:112; Ṭūsī, Amālī 443; Ibn ʿAṭiyyah
5:353 (attrib. al-Ḥasan \[al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī/al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī?\]);
Warrām 2:495; Sibṭ133. 3.107 ʿAbd al-Razzāq 11:319; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad
2:468; Balādhurī 2:119; Thaqafī 2:588; Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim, Sunnah 476;
Nuʿmān, Sharḥ1:160; Ṣadūq, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 897 (cont.) Text no. References Amālī
709; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:217; Kūfī 2:284; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ124; Ābī 1:296;
Kārākijī, Maʿdin 26; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 41; Muʾaddib 511; Āmidī 329. 3.108
Muʾaddib 70, 127, 132; Āmidī 24. 3.109 Kulaynī 2:136; Ḥarrānī 396;
Naḥḥās 320; Thaʿālibī, Yatīmah 5:30; Muʾaddib 487; Warrām 1:405, 2:562.
3.110 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:217. 3.111 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ99; Murtaḍā, Amālī
1:153; Āmidī 199; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:217; Warrām 1:108. 3.112 Yaʿqūbī
2:100 (attrib. Prophet); Qummī 2:70; Kulaynī 8:168 (attrib. Prophet);
Makkī 1:139 (attrib. Prophet); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ99; Abū Nuʿaym 3:203;
Karājikī, Kanz 178 (attrib. Prophet); Bayhaqī, Sunan 4:306 (attrib.
Prophet); Muʾaddib 315; Fattāl 490; Ibn ʿAsākir 58:353 (attrib.
Prophet); Dhahabī, Siyar 13:557 (attrib. Prophet); Dhahabī, Mīzān 3:68,
658, 4:263 (attrib. Prophet). 3.113 Nuʿmān, Majālis 305; Abū Bakr
al-Khwārazmī 132; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ100; Muʾaddib 347; Āmidī 223;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:345; Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 378--379. 3.114 Ḥulwānī 53;
Barqī 1:222; Kulaynī 2:45; Qummī 1:100; Ṣadūq, Amālī 432; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī
185; Fattāl 43. 3.115 Muʾaddib 330; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:422; Warrām
1:211. 3.116 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ101; Muʾaddib 426; Āmidī 295; Warrām 1:148.
3.117 Ḥulwānī 65; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ101; Muʾaddib 204; Nuwayrī 1:176. 3.118
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ101; Ibn al-ʿArabī 1:80. 3.119 Minqarī 531; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān
3:148; Ḥarrānī 186--188; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:61--62; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:193;
Ibn Ḥibbān 9:235; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 358; Ṣadūq, Amālī 169; Ṣadūq, Man
1:179; Māmaṭīrī 241; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ102; Tawḥīdī 5:227; Fattāl 493; Ibn
ʿAsākir 42:498--499, 58:79--80. 3.120 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 268; Ḥulwānī 66;
Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:190; Jāḥiẓ, Maḥāsin 132; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:358; Ibn
Abī al-Dunyā, Dhamm 77; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Iṣlāḥal-māl 1:50; Yaʿqūbī
2:208; Ahwāzī, Zuhd 47; Ḥarrānī 188; Abū Bakr al-Dīnawarī 4:51; Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:398; Māmaṭīrī 240; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:224; Kūfī 47; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ102; Ḥuṣrī 1:80; Tawḥīdī 5:227; Mufīd, Irshād 1:296; Ābī
1:185--186; Hārūnī 506--507; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 63; Māwardī, Adab 131;
Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 358; Ṭūsī, Amālī 594; Khaṭīb, Tārīkh 7:297; Rāghib,
Muḥāḍarāt 2:403; Fattāl 441; Zamakhsharī, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 898
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References Rabīʿ 1:64; Ibn Ḥamdūn 1:73; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:499, 58:79--80;
Warrām 1:272; Sibṭ153; Ibn Ṭalḥah 215--216; Ibn Abī al-Iṣbaʿ 277--279;
Ṣafadī 18:7; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:7; Suyūṭī 18:99. 3.121 Kulaynī 2:132;
Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ234; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ103; Muʾaddib 160. 3.122 Ibn Durayd,
Jamharah 1:125; Māmaṭīrī 209; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ103; Mufīd, Irshād 1:298;
Ābī 1:296; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 535; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 46; Ḥul- wānī 67; Ibn
ʿAbd al-Barr, Bahjah 2:281; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:48; Warrām 1:243, 3:22;
Nuwayrī 7:96. 3.123 Ḥarrānī 219; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ103; Muwaffaq biʾllāh
586; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:355; Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ540. 3.124 Ṣadūq,
Khiṣāl 202 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Sibṭ133. 3.125 Kulaynī 5:9;
Ḥarrānī 110, 221; Ṣadūq, Hidāyah 60; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 620; Ṣadūq, Man
1:210, 3:439, 4:416; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ103; Quḍāʿī, Musnad 1:95, 181
(attrib. Prophet); Muʾaddib 223; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd 21:21;
Ṭabrisī, Makārim 215; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Q-R-B" (attrib.
Prophet); Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Q-R-B" (attrib. Prophet); Dhahabī, Siyar
6:262 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq). 3.126 Kulaynī 4:10; Ḥarrānī 111, 221,
403; Ṣadūq, Amālī 532; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 619, 621; Ṣadūq, Man 4:381, 416;
Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:59; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ104; Thaʿālibī, Tafsīr 5:446 (attrib.
Prophet); Ḥuṣrī 1:81; Quḍāʿī, Musnad 1:233 (attrib. Prophet); Muʾaddib
89; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 138; Faḍlallāh al- Rāwandī 86; Dhahabī, Mīzān 1:452
(attrib. Prophet). 3.127 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ104; Āmidī 152; Ibn al-ʿArabī
1:102. 3.128 Ḥarrānī 60, 214; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 620; Ṣadūq, Man 2:64; Ibn
ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd 21:20 (attrib. Prophet through ʿAlī). 3.129 Ḥulwānī
49; Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 1:85; Jāḥiẓ, ʿUthmāniyyah 36; Ṣūlī 74; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ104; Ḥarrānī 111, 214, 221, 403; Ṣadūq, Amālī 532; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl
620; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:59; Ṣadūq, Man 4:416; Karājikī, Kanz 287; Bayhaqī,
Maḥāsin 232 (attrib. Luqmān al-Ḥakīm); Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:160; Dha-
habī, Mīzān 1:626, 2:481. 3.130 Ḥarrānī 221; Ṣadūq, Man 4:416 (attrib.
Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ104; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:145; Dhahabī,
Siyar 6:262 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq). 3.131 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ104; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 51; Muʾaddib 380; Fattāl 350; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:283. 3.132
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ105; Muʾaddib 284. 3.133 Kumayl ibn Ziyād transmitter
(Raḍī names him); Ḥulwānī 57; Iskāfī, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix
of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 899 (cont.) Text no.
References Miʿyār 79; Ibn Qutaybah, Gharīb 2:108; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn
2:129, 358; Thaqafī 1:148--154; Yaʿqūbī 2:205--206; Ibn al-Anbārī 1:178;
Nuʿmān, Asās 62; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:370; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:81--82; Abū Bakr
al-Dīnawarī 2:148; Ḥarrānī 169; Ṣadūq, Kamāl 290; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 186;
Māmaṭīrī 147-- 150; Makkī 1:246; Azharī s.v. "H-M-J"; Abū Hilāl, Dīwān
1:146; Kūfī 2:95; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ105; Mufīd, Amālī 247; Mufīd, Irshād
1:227; Abū Nuʿaym 1:131; Hārūnī 202--203; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 145--147;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 92; Bayhaqī, Maḥāsin 400; Ṭūsī, Amālī 20; Khaṭīb, Tārīkh
7:408; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Jāmiʿ 2:984; Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī vol. 2 majlis
1, majlis 60; Jur- jānī 81--82; Muʾaddib 150; Fattāl 10; ʿImād al-Dīn
al-Ṭabarī 52; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 365--366; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 10:308; Ibn
ʿAsākir 5:252; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ2:410; ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad, Tāj 126; Sibṭ141;
Qurṭubī 18:94--95; Mizzī 24:220; Ibn al-Qayyim, Iʿlām 2:135; Ibn
al-Qayyim, Miftāḥ1:123; Ibn al-Kathīr, Bidāyah 9:57; Dhahabī, Tadhkirah
1:15; Ibn Abī al-ʿIzz 85. 3.134 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 222; Mubarrad, Fāḍil 6;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 532; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:58--59; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ106; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 295; Mufīd, Irshād 1:300; Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 34; Karājikī, Maʿdin
67; Ṭūsī, Amālī 494; Ḥuṣrī 1:77; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Adab 44; Muʾaddib 18,
201; Fattāl 109; Ibn ʿAṭiyyah 3:255 (unattrib.); Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 375;
Ibn Munqidh 330 (attrib. Prophet); Rāzī, Mafātīḥ22:42 (attrib. Prophet).
3.135 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 222; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 420; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ106; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 297. 3.136 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:101; Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Tawbah 55;
Mubarrad, Fāḍil 94-- 95; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:134; Ḥarrānī 157; Māmaṭīrī
385--386; Abū Hilāl, Jamharah 1:272; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ109; Mufīd, Amālī
330; Ābī 1:277; Muwaf- faq biʾllāh 552; Ḥuṣrī 1:77; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 88;
Māwardī, Ḥāwī 16:212; Ṭūsī, Amālī 111; Muʾaddib 550; Ṭarṭūshī 109; Ibn
Ḥamdūn 1:75; Ḍiyāʾ Ibn al- Athīr 1:275; Sibṭ134; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:192;
Ibn Rajab 344; Muttaqī-Hindī 16:205. 3.137 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 8; Muʾaddib
402. 3.138 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ106; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 8. 3.139 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
3:102; Muʾaddib 543; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:69. 3.140 Muʾaddib 64, 98; Āmidī
54. 3.141 Āmidī 46. 3.142 Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:98, 2:353; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ107; Mufīd, Irshād 1:232; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:66. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 900 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
3.143 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107. 3.144 Muʾaddib 339; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:7;
Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ283. 3.145 Kulaynī 8:152; Ḥarrānī 220; Ṣadūq, Amālī
380 (attrib. Jaʿfar); Mufīd, Ikhti- ṣāṣ226. 3.146 Ḥarrānī 7, 220, 368;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 380; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ108; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ 226; Muʾaddib 69,
443; Āmidī 264--266; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:455; Ibn ʿAsākir 44:359
(attrib. ʿUmar). 3.147 Ḥarrānī 214; ʿAyyāshī 1:139; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 620;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:90; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 228. 3.148 Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ243;
Āmidī 196. 3.149 Sulaym 2:405; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 6:432 (attrib.
Prophet); Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:350; Jaṣṣāṣ1:84, 2:243, 3:590 (attrib.
Prophet); Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 568; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ṭ-W-ʿ"
(attrib. Prophet). 3.150 Ṭūsī, Amālī 567; Muʾaddib 542; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf
180. 3.151 Muʾaddib 40; Āmidī 21; Zamakhsharī 4:186; Warrām 1:252. 3.152
Muʾaddib 37, 512; Āmidī 13--14. 3.153 Ibn Aʿtham 4:260; Thaqafī 1:317;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 26; Muʾaddib 367; Ibn al-ʿArabī 1:106 (unattrib.); Ibn
Ṭalḥah 295. 3.154 Kulaynī 2:451, 8:385; Ḥarrānī 208; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110.
3.155 Jāḥiẓ, Bukhalāʾ 148 (attrib. anon); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110; Muʾaddib
103, 380; Āmidī 236. 3.156 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ245;
Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 34; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 297; Muʾaddib 61; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ
1:41 (attrib. anon). 3.157 Kulaynī 8:22; Ḥarrānī 90; Ṣadūq, Man 4:388;
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 34; Muʾaddib 436; Āmidī 289. 3.158
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110; Muʾaddib 438; Āmidī 286; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:335;
Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88, 2:69; Warrām 1:234. 3.159 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ110;
Muʾaddib 132; Āmidī 142; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:311; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
1:168. 3.160 Āmidī 27; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88, 2:69. 3.161 Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ110; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:7. 3.162 Muʾaddib 82; Āmidī 61;
Ṭarṭūshī 203; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:75; Warrām 34. 3.163 Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ110. 3.164 Āmidī 20; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:270; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz
1:88, 2:69. 3.165 Āmidī 158; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88, 2:69. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 901 (cont.) Text no. References 3.166
Balādhurī 2:114; Kulaynī 8:20; Ḥarrānī 94; Māmaṭīrī 354; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ
112, 124; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 155; Muʾaddib 542; Warrām 2:183, 3:113; Rāzī,
Mafātīḥ2:401. 3.167 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107; Muʾaddib 377; Āmidī 310. 3.168
Mufīd, Irshād 1:254. 3.169 Minqarī 315; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 61; Ibn Abī
Shaybah 6:333 (§31840), 7:555 (§37898), 7:559 (§37915); Mubarrad, Kāmil
3:139, 163; Abū Yaʿlā, Musnad 1:397; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:88; Masʿūdī, Murūj
2:408; Māmaṭīrī 178; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ2:293, 321; Nuʿmān, Manāqib 214, 225;
Ṣadūq, Amālī 491; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107; Mufīd, Irshād 1:16, 317; Murtaḍā,
Tanzīh 200; Ṭūsī, Amālī 261; Ṭūsī, Talkhīṣv. 1 pt. 2 pp. 263--264;
Khaṭīb, Tārīkh 8:160; Ibn ʿAbd al- Barr, Tamhīd 23:332; Muʾaddib 480;
Fattāl 136; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:396, 534; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:182, 372; ʿIzz
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:694; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:323, 327. 3.170
Qummī 2:287; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107; Muʾaddib 404. 3.171 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107.
3.172 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:50; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 292; Ibn
Qutay- bah, ʿUyūn 2:260; Yaʿqūbī 2:212; Kulaynī 8:67; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
4:157; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ1:373; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ107; Mufīd, Irshād 1:240;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376. 3.173 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ111; Muʾaddib 444; Āmidī
274. 3.174 Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ111; Karājikī, Taʿajjub 54; Āmidī 326. 3.175
Qālī, Amālī 2:54, 2:100 (attrib. ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz); Hārūnī 261;
Muʾaddib 179; Warrām 1:243. 3.176 Balādhurī 2:115; Masʿūdī, Murūj 4:262;
Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 16; Tanūkhī 1:158; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ112; al-Mufīd, Irshād
1:234; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 587; Fattāl 427; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:90. 3.177
Ḥulwānī 47; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 228; Balādhurī 2:115; Mubarrad, Kāmil 2:211;
Māmaṭīrī 153; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ112; Āmidī 113. 3.178 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn
1:415 (attrib. ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz); Balādhurī 122; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ112; Muʾaddib 489; Āmidī 318; Ṭarṭūshī 86 (attrib. anonymous
sages); Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:217. 3.179 Balādhurī 2:134; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ112; Muʾaddib 512; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:393; Ibn Shahrāshūb
1:370. 3.180 Jāḥiẓ, Bukhalāʾ 248 (unattrib.); Balādhurī 2:135; Mubarrad,
Kāmil 1:166 (attrib. "proverbs of the Arabs"); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ113; Āmidī
256. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 902 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
3.181 Nearly identical to §3.83. See sources there. 3.182 ʿAbd al-Razzāq
10:150; Minqarī 489; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 170; Ibn Abī Shaybah 7:562 (§37930);
Shāfiʿī 4:229; Ibn Shādhān 474; Muslim 2:749 (§1066); Balādhurī 2:352;
Yaʿqūbī 2:191; Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim 2:453; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:72-- 73; Ibn
Durayd, Ishtiqāq 219--220; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:232; Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:393;
Makkī 1:434; Jaṣṣāṣ2:45, 3:533; Kūfī 341; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ113; Hārūnī 118;
Ibn Barrāj 1:322; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:369. 3.183 Jāḥiẓ, Rasāʾil 1:283;
Balādhurī 2:115; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:152 (attrib. Ibn al-ʿAbbās); Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ113; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:345; Samʿānī, Tafsīr 2:424; 3.184
Balādhurī 2:115; Yaʿqūbī 2:209--210: Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:152 (attrib.
ʿUmar); Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb 10:150; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:376; Muʾaddib 544;
Āmidī 354; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:313. 3.185 Minqarī 250; Ibn Saʿd 3:43;
Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:183; Balādhurī 2:500; Ṭabarī, Tafsīr 13:156;
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ114; Thaʿlabī 5:276. Muʾaddib 152; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah
1:53. 3.186 Ibn Qutaybah, Imāmah 1:71; Yaʿqūbī 2:180; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ114;
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 2:173 (cites Iskāfī). 3.187 Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:298;
Muʾaddib 87; Fattāl 437; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 523. 3.188 Mubarrad, Fāḍil 94;
Abū Hilāl, Dīwān 1:154; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ115; Māwardī, Adab 202; Bayhaqī,
Maḥāsin 124; Āmidī 340; Ibn Munqidh 335; Nuwayrī 3:248. 3.189 Māmaṭīrī
153; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ115; Muʾaddib 376; Āmidī 239; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88.
3.190 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 1:408; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:140; Māmaṭīrī 243;
Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ115; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 588; Karājikī, Kanz 147; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 29; Muʾaddib 55; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 3:178; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:238;
Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88; Warrām 1:355. 3.191 Ḥulwānī 53; Kulaynī 2:112;
Muʾaddib 162; Daylamī 296. 3.192 Ḥulwānī 51; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:96;
Ḥarrānī 89; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ118; Karā- jikī, Kanz 225; Āmidī 265. 3.193
Furāt 314; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ70; Muʾaddib 405; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:463;
Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 7:414. 3.194 Ḥarrānī 211; Māmaṭīrī 210; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr
72; Muʾaddib 360. 3.195 Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Ikhwān 128; Kulaynī 8:16;
Ḥarrānī 97, 98, 381; Ṣadūq, Man 4:389; Karājikī, Kanz 34, 163; Māwardī,
Adab 185, 342 (anon); al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 903 (cont.) Text no. References
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 10; Muʾaddib 23, 38--39, 61, 114, 355, 524; Samʿānī,
Ansāb 6:213 (attrib. Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad al-Rīḥānī); Majd
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "F-D-M"; Ibn al-Jawzī, Zād 2:47; Ibn Ṭalḥah
277; Daylamī 178; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "F-D-M"; Nuwayrī 29:182. 3.196 Ḥarrānī
90, 214; Abū Hilāl, Dīwān 2:94; Tawḥīdī, Imtāʿ 260; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt
1:324; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:186; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 539; Ibn Ṭalḥah 274.
3.197 Ḥuṣrī 4:1056; Āmidī 62; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 2:69. 3.198 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat
230; Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 39; Muʾaddib 448; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:217;
Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376. 3.199 Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Adab 111; Ṭarṭūshī 203.
3.200 Kulaynī 8:23; Ḥarrānī 98; Abū Hilāl, Dīwān 2:94; Tawḥīdī, Imtāʿ
260; Muʾaddib 451. 3.201 Kulaynī 8:23; Ḥarrānī 97; Ṣadūq, Man 4:388;
Tawḥīdī, Imtāʿ 260; Karā- jikī, Kanz 34; Karājikī, Maʿdin 22; Quḍāʿī,
Dustūr 36; Muʾaddib 18, 354; Ṭarṭūshī 203; Warrām 2:185; Daylamī 178.
3.202 Muʾaddib 234; Āmidī 170; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:365. 3.203 Ḥulwānī
63; Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230; Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 39; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376;
Muʾaddib 13, 125; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:608 (attrib. anon); Maydānī 2:162;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:269; Muʾayyad, Ṭirāz 1:88; Warrām 1:180. 3.204
Ṣadūq, Man 4:390; Muʾaddib 411; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:297. 3.205 Ḥarrānī
91; Ṣadūq, Amālī 531; Ṣadūq, Man 4:389; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:58; Karā- jikī,
Kanz 57; Fattāl 466; Āmidī 150; Muʾaddib 193; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:322
(attrib. al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī); Ibn ʿAsākir 51:411 (attrib. Faḍl ibn
ʿIyāḍ); Ibn Kathīr, Ṭabaqāt 1:32 (attrib. Shāfiʿī); Dhahabī, Siyar 10:41
(attrib. Shāfiʿī); Dhahabī, Tārīkh 14:326 (attrib. Shāfiʿī). 3.206
Muʾaddib 121, 467. 3.207 Ḥarrānī 98, 215; Kulaynī 8:23; Ṣadūq, Man
4:391; Ḥuṣrī 4:1054; Fattāl 360; Muʾaddib 450; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:119.
3.208 Ḥulwānī 47; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:138; Āmidī 145; Ṭarṭūshī 108; Zama-
khsharī, Rabīʿ 2:136. 3.209 Muʾaddib 54; Āmidī 219; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
3:136. 3.210 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:273; Ibn al-Ṣabbāgh
1:546. 3.211 Ḥulwānī 17; Ibn Mājah 1:26; Ḥarrānī 422 (unattrib.);
Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam awsaṭ6:226 (attrib. Prophet); Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 179
(attrib. Prophet), 609 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 904 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
(unattrib.); Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 186 (attrib. ʿAlī al-Riḍā); Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:31
(attrib. Prophet), 1:133, 2:205 (attrib. Prophet); Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ100;
Thaʿlabī 1:146; Ṭūsī, Amālī 369, 448; Ibn al-Jawzī, Mawḍūʿāt 1:128
(attrib. Prophet); Daylamī 134; Ibn al-Jazarī 75. 3.212 Ḥarrānī 8, 217;
ʿAyyāshī 1:120; Mufīd, Amālī 188 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Karājikī,
Kanz 160; Ṭūsī, Amālī 229; Sibṭ134. 3.213 Muʾaddib 386; Āmidī 242;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:327; Nuwayrī 3:247. 3.214 Ṭabarī, Tafsīr 14:223;
Qummī 2:390; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 81; Zamakhsharī, Kashshāf 2:366; Qurṭubī
10:174. 3.215 Muʾaddib 298; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:432. 3.216 Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:429; ʿAyyāshī 2:289; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 257; Muʾaddib 34;
Qurṭubī 10:165. 3.217 Muʾaddib 432; Raḍī, Majāzāt 67; Āmidī 271;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:7; Ibn ʿAsākir 50:163. 3.218 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn
1:197; Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:167; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 1:94; Māmaṭīrī 376;
Muwaffaq biʾllāh 573; Muʾaddib 527; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 2:147; Ibn Munqidh
222. 3.219 Makkī 2:422; Fattāl 372; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:252. 3.220
Āmidī 48; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 446. 3.221 Ṣadūq, Amālī 722; Muʾaddib 145,
404; Āmidī 116; Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ 138; Warrām 1:249. 3.222 Ḥulwānī 99;
Ḥarrānī 246; Kulaynī 2:84, 5:35; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 188 (attrib. Jaʿfar
al-Ṣādiq); Muʾaddib 158; Āmidī 111; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:299; Ibn
ʿAsākir 41:410; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 9:123 (attrib. ʿAlī Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn). 3.223 Āmidī 47; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 2:252. 3.224 Āmidī 279;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:399; Warrām 1:206. 3.225 Ḥuṣrī 1:80; Muʾaddib 53;
Āmidī 42; Ṭarṭūshī 203. 3.226 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:312; Muḥammad
al-Waṭwāṭ81; Warrām 2:531. 3.227 Ḥarrānī 361; Muʾaddib 84; Āmidī 63;
Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 2:416 (attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
2:171. 3.228 Ḥuṣrī 2:430; Āmidī 139; Ṭarṭūshī 197; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
2:85. 3.229 Ḥarrānī 206; Muʾaddib 155; Āmidī 108. 3.230 Ibn Qutaybah,
ʿUyūn 3:119 (attrib. anon); Makkī 2:316 3:119 (attrib. anon); Āmidī 139.
3.231 Jāḥiẓ, Bukhalāʾ 245 (attrib. anon); Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 230; Thaʿālibī,
Iʿjāz 39; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376; Fattāl 473; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:276.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 905 (cont.) Text no. References 3.232
Muʾaddib 28. 3.233 Ḥarrānī 82; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:297. 3.234 Jāḥiẓ,
Miʾat 230; Muʾaddib 120; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 4:288 (attrib. Prophet); Āmidī
90; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:459; Warrām 1:215; Sibṭ135; Ibn Rajab 40
(unattrib.) 3.235 Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 33; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 288; Muʾaddib 339;
Fattāl 30. 3.236 Muʾaddib 479; Fattāl 441; Āmidī 168; Ibn Kathīr,
Bidāyah 2:105 (attrib. Jesus); Ibn Kathīr, Qiṣaṣ2:441 (attrib. Jesus).
3.237 Ḥulwānī 46; Āmidī 230; Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 323--324; Nuwayrī,
8:182; Ibn Ṭalḥah 301. 3.238 Kulaynī 6:445; Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:353
(attrib. Prophet by way of ʿAlī); Abū al-Faraj, Maqātil 317; Muʾaddib
93. 3.239 Muʾaddib 392; Āmidī 246. 3.240 Muʾaddib 62; Āmidī 52. 3.241
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:163. 3.242 Kumayl ibn Ziyād transmitter (Raḍī names
him); Bāʿūnī 2:140. 3.443 Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 376 (cites Jāḥiẓ); Muʾaddib
135. 3.244 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:143. 3.245 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 1:235;
Jāḥiẓ, Ḥayawān 3:329; Nuʿmān, Sharḥ3:361; Azharī s.v. "Q-Z-ʿ"; Harawī
s.v. "Dh-N-B"; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "ʿ-S-B"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "ʿ-S-B." 3.246 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:331; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 2:411;
Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 2:274; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:492; Harawī s.v. "Sh-Ḥ-Ḥ"; Azharī
s.v. "Sh-Ḥ-Ḥ"; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "Sh-Ḥ-Ḥ"; Ibn ʿAsākir 29:8,
30:293, 44:219; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Sh-Ḥ-Ḥ"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "Sh-Ḥ-Ḥ." 3.247 Khalīl s.v. "Q-Ḥ-M"; Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:342;
Shāfiʿī 3:237, 7:127; Ibn Fāris 5:61 s.v. "Q-Ḥ-M"; Jawharī s.v. "Q-Ḥ-M";
Harawī s.v. "Q-Ḥ-M"; Ṭūsī, Mabsūṭ2:360; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Q-Ḥ-M"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Q- Ḥ-M." 3.248 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:349;
Jawharī s.v. "N-Ṣ-Ṣ"; Harawī s.v. "Ḥ-Q-Q"; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq
s.v. "N-Ṣ-Ṣ"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ḥ-Q-Q," "N-Ṣ-Ṣ"; Ibn Manẓūr
s.v. "N-Ṣ-Ṣ." 3.249 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:353; Harawī s.v. "lumẓah";
Thaʿlabī 5:113; Thaʿālibī, Tafsīr 1:53, 5:113; Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq
s.v. "L-M-Ẓ"; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "N-Ṣ-Ṣ." 3.250 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:357;
Bayhaqī, Sunan 4:252 (cites Abū ʿUbayd); Zamakhsharī, Fāʾiq s.v. "Ẓ-N-N"
(attrib. ʿUthmān); Qurṭubī 19:242; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Ẓ-N-N." al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 906 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
3.251 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:359; Harawī s.v. "ʿ-Dh-B." 3.252 Abū ʿUbayd,
Gharīb 4:361; Yaʿqūbī 2:207; Harawī s.v. "Y-S-R"; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:502.
3.253 Minqarī 90; Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 4:371; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 2:453;
Abū Yaʿlā, Musnad 1:258; Ibn Fāris 2:101 s.v. "Ḥ-M-R"; Jawharī
s.v. "Ḥ-M-R"; Harawī s.v. "Ḥ-M-R"; Thaʿlabī 2:53; Thaʿālibī, Tafsīr
2:126; Baghawī 1:206; Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ 1:488; Samʿānī, Tafsīr 1:42
(attrib. anon.); Ibn ʿAsākir 4:13; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "B-ʾ-S," "T-Q-Y," "Ḥ-M-R," "W-Q-Y"; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Usd
1:29; Qurṭubī 1:227; Ibn Manẓūr s.v. "Ḥ-M-R"; Gharnāṭī 3:386 (attrib.
Salamah). 3.254 Muʾaddib 164. 3.255 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān 3:211; Balādhurī 2:238,
274; Yaʿqūbī 2:210; Ṭūsī, Amālī 134. 3.256 Ḥuṣrī 3:730; Muʾaddib 304;
Ṭarṭūshī 120 (attrib. "a wise man"). 3.257 Fattāl 372; Quṭb al-Dīn
Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 293; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:498. 3.258--259 None 3.260 This
saying is part of §3.358. See sources there. 3.261 Balādhurī 5:588; Ibn
Abī Shaybah 7:259 (§35876); Ḥarbī 3:1059; Ḥarrānī 201; Qālī, Amālī
2:204; Makkī 2:362; Abū Hilāl, Jamharah 1:184. 3.262 Ḥulwānī 53; Raḍī,
Khaṣāʾiṣ98; Muʾaddib 66. 3.263 Ibn Mājah 2:269; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
4:440; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:189. 3.264 Kulaynī 7:264; Ibn Shahrāshūb 2:202.
3.265 Muʾaddib 414. 3.266 Ḥarrānī 155; Kulaynī 5:82. 3.267 Āmidī 337;
Ibn ʿAsākir 42:493. 3.268 Muʾaddib 160; Maydānī 2:455; Ibn Ṭalḥah 281;
Nuwayrī 3:376. 3.269 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:174 (attrib. Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn);
Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 3:332; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:389. 3.270 None 3.271 Ḥarrānī
236; Muʾaddib 135; Āmidī 234--235. 3.272 Āmidī 310; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:451; Sibṭ156; Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ 104. 3.273 Māmaṭīrī 329; Ṣadūq,
Tawḥīd 365; Thaʿlabī 2:225; Muʾaddib 319; Fattāl 40; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:512,
51:182; Burrī 2:251; Sibṭ156. 3.274 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:144; Muʾaddib
132. 3.275 Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:385; Kulaynī 2:237; Ḥarrānī 234;
Khaṭīb, Tārīkh 14:265; Muʾaddib 398; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 421; Ibn ʿAsākir
13:254; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 8:43. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 907 (cont.) Text no. References 3.276
Fattāl 420; Āmidī 262. 3.277 Yaʿqūbī 2:209; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 3:255;
Kulaynī 3:261; Ḥarrānī 209; Māmaṭīrī 289--290; Fattāl 423; Muʾaddib
161--162; Āmidī 121; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 489; Ibn ʿAsākir 9:131; Nuwayrī
5:167. 3.278 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 212; Āmidī 103; Nuwayrī 5:196. 3.279 Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:494; Ḥarrānī 205; Muʾaddib 523. 3.280 Jāḥiẓ, Bayān
3:275; Ibn Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:227; Thaqafī 1:180; Yaʿqūbī 2:209; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 2:128; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 441; Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 5:225; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr
128; Fattāl 46; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 2:559; Ṭabrisī, Iḥtijāj 1:400; Quṭb
al-Dīn Rāwandī, Kharāʾij 2:572; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:48; Ibn Shahrāshūb
2:203. 3.281 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:227 (rendered into verse); Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 1:405. 3.282 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:277; Ibn ʿAsākir 63:246. 3.283
Muʾaddib 476; Āmidī 309; Sibṭ135. 3.284 Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ239; Mufīd,
Irshād 1:298; Maydānī 2:453; Nuwayrī 3:6; Warrām 2:369. 3.285 Āmidī 313;
Muʾaddib 64; Ṭarṭūshī 197; Irbilī 3:139. 3.286 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 4:288;
Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:149. 3.287 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 14; Āmidī 187; Maydānī 2:454;
Ṭarṭūshī 203; Ibn Ṭalḥah 280. 3.288 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 28; Muʾaddib 478;
Āmidī 313; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:163; Quṭb al-Dīn Rāwandī, Daʿawāt 21.
3.289 Māmaṭīrī 239; Ābī 1:284; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 586; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt
2:405. 3.290 Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:243; Āmidī 107. 3.291 Abū ʿUbayd, Amthāl
110 (attrib. "an Arab sage"); Muʾaddib 476; Āmidī 307; Maydānī 2:292
(attrib. anon. Bedouin sage). 3.292 Ḥarrānī 224; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 368; Abū
Nuʿaym 1:75; Muʾaddib 386; Irbilī 3:142. 3.293 Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:70;
Mufīd, Irshād 2:185; Fattāl 209; Āmidī 361; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:292;
Maydānī 2:454; Ibn Shahrāshūb 3:357; Irbilī 2:383. 3.294 Ibn Ṭalḥah 279.
3.295 Āmidī 68; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:297; Warrām 1:187. 3.296 Masʿūdī,
Murūj 2:418; Hārūnī 506. 3.297 Ibn Qutaybah, Maʿārif 1:580; Ṭabarī-Āmulī
674; Abū Nuʿaym 5:26; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:490. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 908
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References 3.298 Ḥulwānī 129; Kulaynī 3:454; Muʾaddib 158; Fattāl 414;
Āmidī 113; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:279. 3.299 Dārimī 4:2098; Tirmidhī 5:172
(attrib. Prophet); Kulaynī 1:61; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:103; Kūfī 2:30;
Masʿūdī, Murūj 3:106. Rāzī, Mafātīḥ2:251. 3.300 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:7;
Maydānī 1:306; Nuwayrī 6:65 (attrib. anon). 3.301 Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt
1:133. 3.302 Iskāfī, Miʿyār 251; Nuʿmān, Manāqib 216 (attrib. Prophet
re. ʿAlī); Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 633; Ṣadūq, Maʿānī 314; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr,
Istīʿāb 4:1744; Muʾaddib 32, 165; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr
s.v. "Y-ʿ-S-B"; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Usd 5:287 (attrib. Prophet re
ʿAlī). 3.303 Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:274; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:47; Sibṭ162;
Nuwayrī 8:169. 3.304 Tawḥīdī, Baṣāʾir 1:117. 3.305 Āmidī 102;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:91. 3.306 Isḥāq 179; Thaqafī 1:179; Kulaynī 6:381;
Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:91; Māmaṭīrī 146; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 589; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl
209; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal 2:593; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 2:218; Muʾaddib 132; Maydānī
2:454. 3.307 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 4:441; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:353. 3.308 Minqarī
531; Iskāfī, Miʿyār 193; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:62; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al- Athīr,
Kāmil 2:575. 3.309 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:88; Masʿūdī, Murūj 2:402; ʿIzz
al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr, Kāmil 2:697; Ibn Kathīr, Bidāyah 7:320. 3.310
Muʾaddib 90; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:171; Warrām 2:460. 3.311 Thaqafī
1:295; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:108; Ibn ʿAsākir 34:431; Nuwayrī 20:252. 3.312
Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 5:552; Ṭabarī, Tafsīr 23:170; Baghawī 3:698. 3.313 Ḥuṣrī
1:80; Āmidī 202, 308. 3.314 Nuʿmān, Daʿāʾim 1:245; Fattāl 454; Āmidī
108; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 228. 3.315 Muʾaddib 59. 3.316 Āmidī 97;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:278. 3.317 Āmidī 20, 106; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:291.
3.318 Minqarī 126; Jāḥiẓ, Rasāʾil 106; Harawī s.v. "Ẓ-L-L"; Majd al-Dīn
Ibn al- Athīr s.v. "Ẓ-L-L." 3.319 Kulaynī 2:226; Maydānī 2:454;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:157; Ibn ʿAsākir 17:419 (attrib. Dhū al-Nūn
al-Miṣrī); Sibṭ138; Dhahabī, Tārīkh 21:277. 3.320 Kūfī 81; Kulaynī
3:259; Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn 1:43; Mufīd, Amālī 309. 3.321 Dajājī 11. 3.322
Ḥarrānī 112; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 621. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 909 (cont.) Text no. References 3.323
Makkī 2:272 (attrib. anon.); Muʾaddib 64; Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 1:86 (rendered
in rajaz verse); Irbilī 3:139. 3.324 Āmidī 292; Maydānī 2:454. 3.325
Ḥarrānī 90; Karājikī, Kanz 138; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 14; Muʾaddib 69; Maydānī
2:454; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:407; Warrām 1:208; Ibn Ṭalḥah 280; Irbilī
3:139. 3.326 Āmidī 221; Muḥammad al-Waṭwāṭ81. 3.327 Muʾaddib 66, 472;
Āmidī 57; Sibṭ135. 3.328 Muʾaddib 472; Āmidī 101, 224. 3.329
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:194. 3.330 Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 85 (attrib. Maʾmūn);
Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt 1:449; Ṭarṭūshī 204; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:104. 3.331
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:108. 3.332 Ḥarrānī 88; Kulaynī 8:19; Quḍāʿī 36;
Maydānī 2:454; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:328; Warrām 2:182. 3.333 Yaʿqūbī
2:207; Kulaynī 1:37; Ḥarrānī 10, 21; Karājikī, Maʿdin 33; Muʾaddib 404;
Fattāl 466; Warrām 2:378. 3.334 Tanūkhī 1:177; Āmidī 416. 3.335 Fattāl
429; Āmidī 340; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 4:282; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 159. 3.336
Āmidī 68; Ḥarrānī 203. 3.337 Kulaynī 6:17; Māmaṭīrī 394. 3.338
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:300. 3.339 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:342. 3.340 Muʾaddib
151; Āmidī 77. 3.341 Iskāfī, Tamḥīṣ48; Ḥarrānī 206. 3.342 Muʾaddib 556;
Āmidī 154, 359; Warrām 3:215; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Ṣ-R-F"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "Ṣ-R-F." 3.343 Kulaynī 2:362; Ṣadūq, Amālī 380; Mufīd,
Ikhtiṣāṣ226; Warrām 3:210. 3.344 Ḥulwānī 48; Āmidī 43. 3.345 Ḥulwānī 48.
3.346 Ḥulwānī 48; Maydānī 2:454. 3.347 Ḥulwānī 48; Āmidī 250. 3.348
Ḥarrānī 202; Mufīd, Amālī 336; Karājikī, Kanz 225; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 10;
Ṭūsī, Amālī 115; Muʾaddib 31; Āmidī 243; Fattāl 10. 3.349 Kulaynī 1:44
(attrib. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq); Māmaṭīrī 153; Āmidī 49; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 243;
Ibn al-ʿArabī 2:159. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 910 appendix of
sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no. References
3.350 Ḥarrānī 221. 3.351 Bāqillānī 146; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 56; Muʾaddib 90;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:88; Warrām 2:74. 3.352 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat 224; Kulaynī
8:19; Ḥarrānī 90--93; Ṣadūq, Amālī 399; Ṣadūq, Man 3:573; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd
73; Karājikī, Kanz 128; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 224; Warrām 2:181--182. 3.353
Ḥarrānī 222; Māmaṭīrī 173; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 197; Hārūnī 207; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 551; Ibn al-Ṭuyūrī 2:538; Fattāl 1:6; Maydānī 2:454; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 241; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 368; Sibṭ159; Ḥammūʾī 1:403; Ḥasan al-
ʿAskarī, 402--403. 3.354.1 Ṭabarī, Tārīkh 6:357; Fattāl 364; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 100; ʿIzz al-Dīn Ibn al- Athīr, Kāmil 3:501. 3.354.2 Māmaṭīrī
227--228. 3.354.3 Nuʿaym 1:69; Qummī 1:213; Muʾaddib 153; Āmidī 11, 152;
Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ 2:311. 3.355 Ibn Aʿtham 2:395; Balādhurī 5:533. 3.356 Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 4:170; Fattāl 502; Ibn Munqidh 90, 393. 3.357 Jāḥiẓ, Miʾat
228; Ḥarrānī 66; Fattāl 385; Ṭarṭūshī 204. 3.358 Ḥulwānī 52; Ibn
Qutaybah, ʿUyūn 2:400; Mubarrad, Kāmil 1:130; Ḥarrānī 86; Ibn ʿAbd
Rabbih 3:102, 160; Makkī 1:138, 2:26; Māmaṭīrī 243; Ṣadūq, Hidāyah 314;
Ṣadūq, Man 4:386; Mufīd, Muqniʿah 361; Tanūkhī 1:158; Muwaffaq biʾllāh
587; Karājikī, Kanz 290--291; Raḍī, Khaṣāʾiṣ115. 3.359 Ṣadūq, Man 4:386;
Sibṭ135. 3.360 Ṣadūq, Man 4:388; Muʾaddib 63; Fattāl 469; Muḥammad ibn
Ṭāhir 318. 3.361 Ḥarrānī 74; Ṣadūq, Man 2:626; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ231;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 80; Muʾaddib 530, 526. 3.362 Ḥarrānī 409; Ṣadūq, Man
2:628; Āmidī 77. 3.363 Muʾaddib 59, 62; Maydānī 2:454; Ibn Ṭalḥah 280.
3.364 Āmidī 304. 3.365 Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 34; Maydānī 2:454; Muʾaddib 456;
Ibn Ṭalḥah 280. 3.366 Ḥulwānī 61; Kulaynī 8:24; Ḥarrānī 99; Ṣadūq, Amālī
400; Ṣadūq, Man 4:392; Ṣadūq, Tawḥīd 74; Rāghib, Mufradāt 300; Warrām
2:186--187. 3.367 Barqī 2:345; Ḥarrānī 203; Ṭūsī, Amālī 147; Maydānī
2:260 (attrib. Prophet David); Irbilī 2:11. 3.368 Muʾaddib 84; Warrām
3:215. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 911 (cont.) Text no. References 3.369
(See 3.134; second part is the same; no citations for first part). 3.370
Ḥarrānī 78; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 545; Āmidī 117. 3.371 Muʾaddib 266; Āmidī
133; Maydānī 1:290 (unattrib.). 3.372 Maydānī 2:454. 3.373 Kulaynī 8:21;
Ḥarrānī 95, 207; Maydānī 2:303 (attrib. Aws ibn al-Ḥārith); Warrām
2:298, 3:215. 3.374 Āmidī 171; Ṭarṭūshī 204. 3.375 Ḥarrānī 202. 3.376
Ḥarrānī 345; Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 126. 3.377 Ibn Shādhān 505; Ibn Qutaybah,
Imāmah 1:69; Ibn ʿAsākir 14:105, 60:44. 3.378 Masʿūdī, Murūj 4:261;
Makkī 2:88; Thaʿlabī 2:261; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 584; Khaṭīb, Tārīkh 11:81,
13:87; Maydānī 2:454. 3.379 Āmidī 232. 3.380 Mufīd, Irshād 1:300;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 32; Maydānī 2:454; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:148; Ibn Ṭalḥah
280. 3.381 Maydānī 2:454. 3.382 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:238. 3.383 Muʾaddib
524; Āmidī 253. 3.384 Ḥulwānī 144; Kulaynī 8:22; Ḥarrānī 97. 3.385 Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbih 3:255 (in verse); Māmaṭīrī 291; Māwardī, Adab 264; Muʾaddib
162; Āmidī 121. 3.386 Māwardī, Adab 264; Muʾaddib 42; Rāghib, Muḥāḍarāt
2:401; Fattāl 441; Āmidī 32; Maydānī 2:454; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 468; Ibn
Ṭalḥah 279. 3.387 Kulaynī 8:72; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 139; Muʾaddib 519; Āmidī
257; Ibn ʿAsākir 42:508; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:378. 3.388 Ḥarrānī 197;
Thaʿlabī 8:315; Rāzī, Mafātīḥ3:471 (attrib. Abū Idrīs). 3.389 Muʾaddib
38. 3.390 Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ342; Murtaḍā, Amālī 1:156; Muʾaddib 488; Āmidī
236; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:342; Muwaffaq Khwārazmī 377. 3.391 Ḥarrānī 89;
Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 637; Ibn Shahrāshūb 1:380. 3.392 Āmidī 177. 3.393 Āmidī
253. 3.394 Kulaynī 8:307; Ṣadūq, Amālī 87; Ṣadūq, Khiṣāl 129; Ṣadūq, Man
4:396; Fattāl 442. 3.395 Kulaynī 1:20. 3.396 Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Qaḍāʾ 23
(attrib. Prophet); Ṭabarānī, Muʿjam awsaṭ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 912
appendix of sources for the texts of nahj al-balāghah (cont.) Text no.
References 5:228; Muʾaddib 141; Āmidī 76; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 546 (attrib.
Prophet); Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir 321. 3.397 None 3.398 Āmidī 212; Ṭabrisī,
Mishkāt 369. 3.399 Fattāl 354. 3.400 Māmaṭīrī 355; Fattāl 498; Muwaffaq
biʾllāh 580; Warrām 2:322. 3.401 Āmidī 82. 3.402 Ḥarrānī 82; Āmidī 150.
3.403 Abū Nuʿaym 1:10 (attrib. Jesus); Muʾaddib 160. 3.404 Āmidī 48.
3.405 Thaʿlab (Raḍī's stated source). 3.406 Muʾaddib 482; Āmidī 230.
3.407 Fattāl 466. 3.408 Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ245; Thaʿālibī, Iʿjāz 34; Ḥuṣrī
1:80; Maydānī 2:454; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:23. 3.409 Muʾaddib 459; Fattāl
434; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:171; Ṭabrisī, Mishkāt 208. 3.410 Maydānī
2:453; Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.411 Muʾaddib 481. 3.412 Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.413
Thaqafī 1:65; Māmaṭīrī 268; Mufīd, Ikhtiṣāṣ81; Muʾaddib 416; Āmidī 262;
Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 1:182; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "F-N-D"; Ibn
Manẓūr s.v. "F-N-D." 3.414 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 3:459. 3.415 Maydānī
2:454; Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.416 Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:256; Zamakhsharī,
Fāʾiq 2:10, s.v. "Dh-ʿ-Dh-ʿ"; Majd al-Dīn Ibn al-Athīr s.v. "Dh-ʿ-Dh-ʿ."
3.417 Muʾaddib 437; Maydānī 2:453; Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.418 Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih
3:121 (attrib. Ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah); Muʾaddib 437; May- dānī 2:453; Ibn
Ṭalḥah 279. 3.419 Muʾaddib 480; Āmidī 232; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 5:111.
3.420 Āmidī 135. 3.421 Mubarrad, Kāmil 2:11; Māmaṭīrī 408; Ṣadūq, ʿIlal
1:276; Ābī 1:299; Muwaf- faq biʾllāh 577; Muʾaddib 479; Fattāl, Rawḍah
412; Maydānī 2:454; Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.422 Āmidī 23. 3.423 Zamakhsharī,
Rabīʿ 5:224. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 appendix of sources
for the texts of nahj al-balāghah 913 (cont.) Text no. References 3.424
Ḥarrānī 391; Muʾaddib 108; Āmidī 59; Maydānī 2:453; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ
1:239; Warrām 1:226. 3.425 Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Makārim 51; Jarīrī 261;
Quḍāʿī, Dustūr 28; Ibn ʿAsākir 9:216; Ibn al-ʿAdīm 7:389; Nuwayrī 3:237.
3.426 Ḥarrānī 223. 3.427 Ibn al-Muʿtazz 21; Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 2:143;
Māmaṭīrī 380; Bāqillānī 68; Muwaffaq biʾllāh 576; Ṭarṭūshī 83, 87. 3.428
Maydānī 2:454; Zamakhsharī, Rabīʿ 2:332; Ibn Ṭalḥah 279. 3.429 Yaʿqūbī
2:206; Ḥarrānī 203, 281; Ṭūsī, Amālī 443; Muʾaddib 268; Ibn Abī Zaynab
37; Maydānī 2:454. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Bibliography Primary
Sources ʿAbd al-Bāqī Tabrīzī Dānishmand (d. after 1039/1630) (comm.).
Minhāj al-walāyah: Fī SharḥNahj al-balāghah. Edited by Ḥabīballāh
ʿAẓīmī. 2 vols. Tehran: Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Mīrāth-i Maktūb,
1378/1959. ʿAbd al-Jabbār ibn Aḥmad, al-Qāḍī al-Asadābādī (d. 415/1025).
Firaq wa-ṭabaqāt al- Muʿtazilah. Edited by ʿAlī Sāmī al-Nashshār and
ʿIṣām al-Dīn Muḥammad ʿAlī. Cairo: Dār al-Maṭbūʿāt al-Jāmiʿiyyah, 1972.
ʿAbd al-Jabbār ibn Aḥmad, al-Qāḍī al-Asadābādī (d. 415/1025). Al-Mughnī
fī abwāb al-
tawḥīdwa-l-ʿadl.GeneraleditorṬāhāḤusayn.20vols.Vol.20editedbyʿAbdal-Ḥalīm
Maḥmūd and Sulaymān al-Dunyā. Cairo: al-Dār al-Miṣriyyah, 1961. ʿAbd
al-Razzāq, Abū Bakr al-Ṣanʿānī (d. 211/827) (comp.). Muṣannaf ʿAbd
al-Razzāq. Edited by Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-Aʿẓamī. Beirut: al-Maktab
al-Islāmī, 1403/1983. al-Ābī, Manṣūr ibn al-Ḥasan (d. 421/1030). Nathr
al-durr. 7 vols. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAlī Qurnah. Cairo: al-Hayʾah
al-Miṣriyyah al-ʿĀmmah li-l-Kitāb. Abu al ʿAtāhiyah (d. ca. 198/813).
Dīwān. Beirut: Dār Bayrūt, 1986. Abū Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī (d. ca. 28/649).
Poems in Dīwān al-Hudhaliyyīn. Edited by Muḥammad Maḥmūd al-Shinqīṭī. 3
vols. Cairo: al-Dār al-Qawmiyyah, 1965. Abū al-Faraj al-Iṣfahānī
(d. 356/976). Kitāb al-Aghānī. 27 vols. in 15. Edited by ʿAbd al- Amīr
ʿAlī Muhannā and Samīr Jābir. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah,
1422/2002. Abū al-Faraj al-Iṣfahānī (d. 356/976). Maqātil al-Ṭālibiyyīn.
Edited by Kāẓim al-Muẓaf- far. Najaf: al-Maktabah al-Ḥaydariyyah,
1385/1965. Abū Hilāl al-ʿAskarī (d. 395/1005). Dīwān al-maʿānī. Beirut:
Dār al-Jīl, 1980--1995. Abū Hilāl al-ʿAskarī (d. 395/1005). Jamharat
al-amthāl. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1988. Abū Hilāl al-ʿAskarī
(d. 395/1005). Al-Furūq al-lughawiyyah. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr
al-Islāmī, 1992. Abū Hilāl al-ʿAskarī (d. 395/1005). Kitāb
al-Ṣināʿatayn. Cairo: ʿĪsā al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī, 1971. Abū Khaythamah
Zuhayr ibn Ḥarb al-Nasāʾī (d. 243/857). Kitāb al-ʿIlm. Edited by Mu-
ḥammad Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī. Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1983. Abū
Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī (d. 430/1038). Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ wa-ṭabaqāt
al-aṣfiyāʾ. 8 vols. Cairo: Maṭbaʿat al-Saʿādah, 1416/1996. Abū
al-Saʿādāt al-Isfahānī (d. 634/1237) (comp.). Maṭlaʿ al-ṣabāḥatayn
wa-majmaʿ al- faṣāḥatayn. Tehran: Pazhūhishgāh-i ʿUlūm-i Insānī va
Muṭālāʿāt-i Farhangī, 1965. Abū al-Ṣalāḥal-Ḥalabī, Taqī al-Dīn
(d. 447/1055). Taqrīb al-maʿārif. Edited by Fāris Tabrīziyyān al-Ḥassūn.
Tehran: Fāris Tabrīziyān al-Ḥassūn, 1996. Abū Tammām (d. ca. 232/845)
and al-Khaṭīb al-Tabrīzī (d. 502/1109) (comm.). Sharḥ Dīwān Abī Tammām.
Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbduh ʿAzzām. 3 vols. Cairo: Dār al- Maʿārif, 1964.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 915 Abū
ʿUbayd al-Qāsim ibn Sallām al-Harawī (d. 224/838). Kitāb al-Amthāl.
Cairo: Dār al-Maʾmūn, 1400/1980. Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim ibn Sallām
al-Harawī (d. 224/838). Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by Ḥusayn Muḥammad
Sharaf. Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-ʿĀmmah li-Shuʾūn al-Maṭābiʿ al- Amīriyyah,
1404/1984. Abū Yaʿlā (d. 307/919) (comp.). Musnad Abī Yaʿlā. Edited by
Ḥusayn Salīm Asad. Dam- ascus: Dār al-Maʾmūn, 1404/1984. al-ʿAdanī,
Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyā (d. 243/858). Al-Īmān. Edited by Ḥamad ibn Ḥamdī
al-Jābirī. Kuwait: Al-Dār al-Salafiyyah, 1407/1986. al-Ahwāzī al-Kūfī,
al-Ḥusayn ibn Saʿīd (active 300/913). Kitāb al-Zuhd. Edited by Ghu- lām
Riḍā ʿIrfāniyyān. Qum: al-Maṭbaʿah al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1361/1979. al-Ahwāzī
al-Kūfī, al-Ḥusayn ibn Saʿīd (active 300/913). Kitāb al-Muʾmin. Qum:
Madra- sat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1993.
ʿAlīibnAbīṬālib(d.40/661),attrib.Medievalcompilationsof
orations,aphorisms,epis- tles, testaments, prayers, and poetry are
listed under the compiler's name: Āmidī, Ḥarrānī, Ḥātim, Jāḥiẓ, Kaydarī,
Nuʿmān, Raḍī, Quḍāʿī, Sulaym, and Ṭabrisī, as are modern compilations by
Ḥaydar, Jindī, Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ, Maḥmūdī, Mīr-Jahānī, Qu- bānchī, and
Shams al-Dīn. ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661) attrib. Al-Ṣaḥīfah
al-ʿAlawiyyah al-mubārakah. Beirut: n.p., 1979. Excerpt translated by
William Chittick as Supplications (Duʿa) of Amir al- muʾminin ʿAli ibn
Abi Talib. London: Muhammadi Trust, 1986. ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Walīd
(d. 612/1215). Dāmigh al-bāṭil wa-ḥatf al-munāḍil. Edited by Muṣṭafā
Ghālib. 2 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat ʿIzz al-Dīn, 1982. ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad
ibn al-Walīd (d. 612/1215)Tāj al-ʿaqāʾid wa-maʿdin al-fawāʾid. Edited by
ʿĀrif Tāmir. Beirut: Muʾassasat ʿIzz al-Dīn, 1982. al-Āmidī
(d. 510/1155) (comp.). Ghurar al-ḥikam wa-durar al-kalim. Edited by
Aḥmad Shawqī Amīn. Najaf: Dār al-Thaqāfah, 1960s. Anon.(3rd/9thc.),
Akhbāral-dawlahal-ʿAbbāsiyyah.EditedbyʿAbdal-ʿAzīzal-Dūrīand ʿAbd
al-Jabbār al-Muṭṭalibī. Beirut: Dār al-Ṭalīʿah, 1971. al-Aʿshā, Maymūn
ibn Qays (d. ca. 7/629). Dīwān al-Aʿshā al-kabīr. Edited by Muḥam- mad
Ḥusayn. Cairo: Maktabat al-Ādāb, 1950. al-ʿĀṣimī, Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad
(d. 450/1058). Al-ʿAsal al-muṣaffā min tahdhīb Zayn al-fatā fī
sharḥSurat Hal Atā. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir Maḥmūdī. 2 vols. Qum:
Majmaʿ Iḥyāʾ al-Thaqāfah al-Islāmiyyah, 1997. al-ʿAyyāshī, Muḥammad ibn
Masʿūd (d. 329/941) (comm.). Tafsīr al-ʿAyyāshī. Edited by Hāshim
Rasūlī-Maḥallātī. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1991. al-Azharī
(d. 370/980). Tahdhīb al-lughah. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAwaḍMurʿib. 8 vols.
Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 2001. al-Baghawī (d. ca.
516/1122) (comm.). Maʿālim al-tanzīl fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. Edited by ʿAbd
al-Razzāq al-Mahdī. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1420/2000. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 916 bibliography
al-Baḥrānī, Kamāl al-Dīn Ibn Maytham (d. 679/1280) (comm.). SharḥNahj
al-balāghah. 5 parts in 1 vol. Manama, Bahrain: Maktabat Fakhrāwī, 2007.
al-Bakrī, Abū ʿUbayd (d. 487/1094) (comm.). Kitāb Faṣl al-maqāl: Fī
SharḥKitāb al- Amthāl. Edited by Iḥsān ʿAbbās and ʿAbd al-Majīd ʿĀbidīn.
Beirut: Muʾassasat al- Risālah, 1971. al-Balādhurī (d. 279/892). Ansāb
al-ashrāf. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir al-Maḥmūdī. 2 vols. Beirut:
Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1394/1974. al-Bāqillānī (d. 403/1013). Iʿjāz
al-Qurʾān. Edited by Aḥmad Ṣaqr. Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, 1997. al-Barqī
(d. 274/887). Kitāb al-Maḥāsin. Edited by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Ḥusaynī
al-Muḥaddith. Tehran: Dār al-Kutub al-Islāmiyyah, 1327/1950. al-Bāʿūnī,
Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad (d. 877/1472). Jawāhir al-maṭālib fī manāqib ʿAlī
ibn Abī Ṭālib. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir al-Maḥmūdī. Qum: Majmaʿ Iḥyāʾ
al- Thaqāfah al-Islāmiyyah, 1995. al-Bayhaqī, Abū Bakr (d. 458/1066)
(comp.). Al-Iʿtiqād wa-l-hidāyah ilā sabīl al-rashād ʿalā madhhab
al-salaf wa-aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth. Edited by Aḥmad ʿIṣām al-Kātib. Beirut: Dār
al-Āfāq al-Jadīdah, 1981. al-Bayhaqī, Abū Bakr (d. 458/1066) (comp.).
Shuʿab al-īmān. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAlī ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd Ḥāmid. 14 vols.
Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 2003. al-Bayhaqī, Abū Bakr (d. 458/1066)
(comp.). Al-Sunan al-kubrā. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā. 11
vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2003. al-Bayhaqī, Ibrāhīm ibn
Muḥammad (fl. ca. 320/932). Al-Maḥāsin wa-l-masāwiʾ. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir,
1380/1960. al-Burrī,MuḥammadibnAbīBakral-Tilimsānī(d.after644/1246).
Al-Jawharahfīnasab
al-nabīwa-aṣḥābihial-ʿashrah.EditedbyMuḥammadal-Tūnjī.2vols.Riyadh:Dāral-
Rifāʿī, 1983. al-Dajājī, Ibn Naṣr (d. 564/1168).
Safaṭal-mulaḥwa-zawḥal-taraḥ. Edited by Khālid Aḥmad al-Mullā
al-Suwaydī. Damascus: Muʾassasat Bayn al-Nahrayn, 1426/ 2007. al-Damīrī,
Muḥammad ibn Mūsā (d. 808/1405). Hayāt al-ḥayawān al-kubrā. Translated
by A.S.G. Jayakar as ad-Damîrí's Ḥayāt al-ḥayawān: A Zoological Lexicon.
2 vols. Lon- don: Luzac, 1906--1908. al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995) (comp.).
Al-Muʾtalif wa-l-mukhtalif. Edited by Muwaffaq ibn ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿAbd
al-Qādir. Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1406/1986. al-Dāraquṭnī
(d. 385/995). Sunan al-Dāraquṭnī. Edited by Shuʿayb al-Arnāʾūṭet al.
Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1424/2004.
al-Dārimī(d.255/869)(comp.).Sunanal-Dārimī.EditedbyḤusaynAsad.4vols.Riyadh:
Dār al-Mughnī, 1421/2000. al-Daylamī (d. 673/1274). Aʿlām al-dīn fī
ṣifāt al-muʾminīn. Qum: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth,
1408/1988. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 917
al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348). Mīzān al-iʿtidāl fī naqd al-rijāl. Edited by
ʿAlī Muḥammad Bajāwī. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1382/1963.
al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348). Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ. Edited by Shuʿayb
al-Arnāʾūṭet al. 25 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1405/1985.
al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348). Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1998.
al-Dhahabī(d.748/1348).Tārīkhal-Islām.EditedbyʿUmarTadmurī.Beirut:Dāral-Kitāb
al-ʿArabī, 1413/1993. al-Dīnawarī, Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn Marwān
(d. 333/945). Al-Mujālasah wa-jawāhir al- ʿilm. Edited by Abū ʿUbaydah
Mashhūr ibn Ḥasan Āl Salmān. 10 vols. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 1419/1998.
al-Dīnawarī, Abū Ḥanīfah Aḥmad ibn Dāʾūd (d. 282/896). Al-Akhbār
al-ṭiwāl. Edited by ʿAbd al-Munʿim ʿĀmir. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub
al-ʿArabī, 1960. Durayd ibn al-Ṣimmah (d. 8/630). Dīwān. Edited by ʿUmar
ʿAbd al-Rasūl. Cairo: Dār al- Maʿārif, 1985. al-Farazdaq (d. 114/732).
Dīwān. Edited by ʿAlī Fāʿūr. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1987.
al-Fattāl (d. 508/1114). Rawḍat al-wāʿiẓīn. Edited by Muḥammad Mahdī.
Najaf: al-Mak- tabah al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1966. Furāt ibn Ibrāhīm al-Kūfī
(fl. 3--4th/9th--10th c.) (comm.). Tafsīr Furāt. Edited by Mu- ḥammad
al-Kāẓim.Tehran:Wizārat al-Thaqāfah wa-l-Irshād al-Īrāniyyah, 1410/1990.
al-Gharnāṭī, Abū Ḥayyān (d. 745/1344) (comm.). Al-Baḥr al-muḥīṭfī
l-tafsīr. Edited by Ṣidqī Muḥammad Jamīl. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr,
1420/2000. al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111). Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn. Beirut: Dār
al-Maʿrifah, 1404/1984. al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111). Sirr al-ʿālamayn
wa-kashf mā fī l-dārayn. Edited by Muḥammad Ḥasan Ismāʿīl and Aḥmad
Farīd al-Mazyadī. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2003. al-Ḥammūʾī
al-Juwaynī, Ṣadr al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad (d. 722/1322). Farāʾid
al-simṭayn fī faḍāʾil al-Murtaḍā wa-l-Batūl wa-Sibṭayn wa-l-aʾimmah min
dhurriyy- atihim ʿalayhim al-salām. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir Maḥmūdī. 2
vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Maḥmūdī, 1978. al-Harawī, Abū ʿUbayd Aḥmad
ibn Muḥammad (d. 401/1011). Kitāb al-Gharībayn fī l- Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth.
Edited by Aḥmad Farīdī al-Mazyadī. 6 vols. Mecca: Maktabat Nizār Muṣṭafā
al-Bāz, 1419/1999. al-Ḥarbī, Ibrāhīm ibn Isḥāq (d. 285/898). Gharīb
al-ḥadīth. Edited by Sulaymān al-ʿĀyid. 3 vols. Mecca: Jāmiʿat Umm
al-Qurā, 1405/1985. al-Ḥarīrī (d. 516/1122). Maqāmāt Abī Zayd al-Sarūjī.
Edited by Michael Cooperson. New York: New York University Press,
Library of Arabic Literature series, 2020. al-Ḥarrānī, Ibn Shuʿbah
(fl. 4th/10th c.) (comp.).Tuḥaf al-ʿuqūl ʿan āl al-rasūl. Edited by ʿAlī
Akbar al-Ghaffārī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1404/1983.
Hārūnī, AbūṬālibYaḥyā ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Zaydī (d. 424/1033), thematic
edition by Jaʿfar al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 918 bibliography ibn
Aḥmad al-Buhlūlī (d. 573/1177). Taysīr al-maṭālib fī Amālī Abī Ṭālib.
Edited by ʿAbdallāh ibn Ḥammūd al-ʿIzzī. Sanaa: Maktabat al-Imām Zayd
ibn ʿAlī, 2002. al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī (attrib.). Tafsīr al-Imām
al-ʿAskarī. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir Najl al-Murtaḍā. Qum: Madrasat
al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1409/1989. Ḥātim ibn Ibrāhīm al-Ḥāmidī Muḥyī al-Dīn
(d. 596/1199). Al-Majālis al-Ḥātimiyyah. ms. Mumbai: Ṭayyibī Daʿwah
Libraries. Ḥātim ibn Ibrāhīm al-Ḥāmidī Muḥyī al-Dīn (d. 596/1199).
Tuḥfat al-qulūb wa-furjat al- makrūb, or:Tuḥfat al-qulūb fī tartīb
al-hudāt wa-l-duʿāt fī jazīrat al-Yaman. Edited by Abbas Hamdani.
London: Dār al-Sāqī, 2012. al-Ḥillī, al-Ḥasan ibn Sulaymān (died after
802/1399). Mukhtaṣar al-Baṣāʾir. Edited by Mushtāq Muẓaffar. Qum:
Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1959. al-Ḥimyarī, ʿAbdallāh ibn Jaʿfar
(d. ca. 309/922). Qurb al-isnād. Beirut: al-Kutub al- Islāmiyyah, 1992.
al-Ḥimyarī, ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad (d. 323/935). Juzʾ ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad
al-Ḥimyarī. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Sulaymān al-Buʿaymī. Riyadh:
Maktabat al-Rushd, 1998. al-Ḥulwānī, al-Ḥusayn ibn Muḥammad
(d. 241/856). Nuzhat al-nāẓir fī tanbīh al-khāṭir. Edited by Muḥammad
Bāqir ibn al-Murtaḍā et al. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Imām al- Mahdī,
1408/1987. Ḥumayd ibn Ahmad al-Muḥallī, al-Qāḍī al-Shahīd (d. 652/1255).
Al-Ḥadāʾiq al-wardiy- yah fī manāqib aʾimmat al-Zaydiyyah. Edited by
Murtaḍā ibn Zayd al-Maḥaṭwarī. Sanaa: Maktabat Markaz Badr al-ʿIlmī
wa-l-Thaqāfī, 2002. al-Ḥuṣrī, Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm ibn ʿAlī (d. 453/1061).
Zahr al-ādāb wa-thamar al-ālbāb.
EditedbyMuḥammadMuḥyīal-DīnʿAbdal-ḤamīdandZakīMubārak.4vols.Beirut: Dār
al-Jīl, 1980s. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (463/1070). Adab al-mujālasah wa-ḥamd
al-lisān. Edited by Samīr Ḥal- abī. Tanta, Egypt: Dār al-Ṣaḥābah
li-l-Turāth, 1409/1989. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (463/1070). Bahjat al-majālis
wa-uns al-mujālis. Edited by Muḥammad Mursī al-Khawlī. 2 vols. Beirut:
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1982. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (463/1070). Al-Istīʿāb
fī maʿrifat al-aṣḥāb. Edited by ʿAlī Muḥammad al-Bajāwī. Beirut: Dār
al-Jīl, 1412/1992. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (463/1070). Jāmiʿ bayān al-ʿilm
wa-faḍluhu. Edited by ʿAbd al-Hādī Munīr and Muṣṭafā Āl Ibrāhīm. Cairo:
Idārat al-Ṭibāʿah al-Munīriyyah, 1398/1978. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (463/1070).
Al-Tamhīd li-mā fī l-Muwaṭṭā min al-maʿānī wa-l-asānīd. Edited by
Muṣṭafā ibn Aḥmad al-ʿAlawī and Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Karīm al-Bakrī. 26
vols. Morocco: Wizārat ʿUmūm al-Awqāf wa-l-Shuʾūn al-Islāmiyyah,
1387/1968. Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (328/940). Al-ʿIqd al-farīd. 8 vols. Beirut:
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1404/1983. Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim al-Ḍaḥḥāk, Abū Bakr
(d. 287/900) (comp.). Sunnah. Edited by Muḥam- mad Nāṣir al-Dīn
al-Albānī. Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1400/1980. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
bibliography 919 Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim al-Ḍaḥḥāk, Abū Bakr (d. 287/900). Kitāb
al-Zuhd. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAlī ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd al-Aʿẓamī. Beirut: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1985. IbnAbīal-Dunyā(d.281/894).
Al-ʿAqlwa-faḍluhu.EditedbyLuṭfīMuḥammad al-Ṣaghīr and Najm ʿAbd
al-Raḥmān Khalaf. Riyadh: Dār al-Rāyah, 1989. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā
(d. 281/894). Kitāb Dhamm al-dunyā. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al- Qādir
ʿAṭā. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Kutub al-Thaqāfiyyah, 1993. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā
(d. 281/894). Kitāb al-Ikhwān. Edited by Muṣṭafā ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā.
Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1409/1988. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā
(d. 281/894). Iṣlāḥal-māl. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā.
Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Kutub al-Thaqāfiyyah, 1414/1993. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā
(d. 281/894). Makārim al-akhlāq. Edited by Magdī Sayyid Ibrāhīm. Cairo:
Maktabat al-Qurʾān, 1411/1990. IbnAbīal-Dunyā(d.281/894).
Maqtalal-ImāmAmīral-muʾminīn.Mashhad:Muʾassasat al-Ṭabʿ wa-l-Nashr,
1411/1991. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā (d. 281/894). Qaḍāʾ al-ḥawāʾij. Edited by
Magdī al-Sayyid Ibrāhīm. Cairo: Maktabat al-Qurʾān, 1986. Ibn Abī
al-Dunyā (d. 281/894). Qiṣar al-amal. Edited by Muḥammad Khayr Ramaḍān
Yūsuf. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 1997. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā (d. 281/894).
Al-Tawāḍuʿ wa-l-khumūl. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiy- yah, 1409/1989.
Ibn Abī al-Dunyā (d. 281/894). Kitāb al-Tawbah. Edited by Magdī
al-Sayyid Ibrāhīm. Cairo: Maktabat al-Qurʾan, 1991.
IbnAbīal-Ḥadīd(d.655/1257)(comm.).SharḥNahjal-balāghah.EditedbyMuḥammad
Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. 20 vols. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyyah,
1965. Ibn Abī al-ʿIzz al-Ḥanafī (d. 792/1390). Kitāb al-Atbāʿ. Edited by
Muḥammad ʿAṭāʾallāh Ḥanīf. Beirut: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1405/1985. Ibn Abī
al-Iṣbaʿ (d. 654/1256). Taḥrīr al-taḥbīr fī ṣināʿat al-shiʿr wa-l-nathr.
Edited by Ḥifnī Muḥammad Sharaf. Cairo: Al-Majlis al-Aʿlā li-l-Shuʾūn
al-Islāmiyyah Lajnat Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-Islāmī, 1383/1963. Ibn Abī
Shaybah (d. 235/849) (comp.). Al-Muṣannaf fī l-aḥādīth wa-l-āthār.
Edited by Kamāl Yūsuf al-Ḥūt. 7 vols. Riyadh: Dār ʿĀlam al-Kutub,
1409/1988.
IbnAbīZaynab,MuḥammadibnIbrāhīmal-Nuʿmānī(fl.early4th/10thc.).
Al-Ghaybah. Qum: Manshūrāt Anwār al-Hudā, 1422/2002. Ibn ʿAdī al-Jurjānī
(d. 365/976). Al-Kāmil fī ḍuʿafāʾ al-rijāl. Edited by ʿĀdil Aḥmad ʿAbd
al-Mawjūd. 9 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1997. Ibn
al-ʿAdīm, Kamāl al-Dīn ʿUmar (d. 660/1261). Bughyat al-ṭalab fī tārīkh
Ḥalab. Edited by al-Mahdī ʿĪd al-Rawāḍiyyah. London: Muʾassasat
al-Furqān, 1437/2016. Ibn al-Anbārī, Abū Bakr (d. 328/940) Al-Zāhir fī
maʿānī kalimāt al-nās. Edited by Ḥātim Ṣāliḥ. 2 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat
al-Risālah, 1992. Ibn al-ʿArabī, Muḥyī al-Dīn (d. 638/1240) (comm.).
Tafsīr Ibn al-ʿArabī. Edited by ʿAbd al-Wārith Muḥammad ʿAlī. Beirut:
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2010. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 920 bibliography Ibn
ʿAsākir (d. 571/1176). Tārīkh Madīnat Dimashq, or Tārīkh Dimashq. Edited
by ʿAmr ibn Gharāmah al-ʿAmrawī. 80 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr,
1995--2000. Ibn Aʿtham al-Kūfī (died early 3rd/9th c.). Kitāb al-Futūḥ.
Edited by ʿAlī Shīrī. 8 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1411/1991. Ibn
al-Athīr, Ḍiyāʾ al-Dīn (d. 637/1239). Al-Mathal al-sāʾir fī adab
al-kātib wa-l-shāʿir. Edited by Aḥmad al-Ḥūfī and Badawī Ṭabānah. Cairo:
Maktabat Nahḍat Miṣr, 1959-- 1962. Ibn al-Athīr, ʿIzz al-Dīn
(d. 630/1233). Al-Kāmil fī l-tārīkh. Edited by ʿUmar ʿAbd al-Salām
Tadmurī. 10 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿArabī, 1417/1997. Ibn
al-Athīr, ʿIzz al-Dīn (d. 630/1233). Usd al-ghābah. Beirut: Dār Ibn
Ḥazm, 1433/2012. Ibnal-Athīr,Majdal-Dīn(d.606/1210).
Al-Nihāyahfīgharībal-ḥadīthwa-l-āthār.Edited by Ṭāhir Aḥmad al-Zāwī and
Maḥmūd Muḥammad al-Ṭanāḥī. 5 vols. Beirut: al- Maktabah al-ʿIlmiyyah,
1399/1979. Ibn ʿAṭiyyah (d. ca. 541/1147) (comm.). Al-Muḥarrir al-wajīz
fī tafsīr al-Kitāb al-ʿazīz.
EditedbyʿAbdal-SalāmʿAbdal-ShāfīMuḥammad.Beirut:Daral-Kutubal-ʿIlmiyyah,
2002. Ibn Bakkār, Zubayr (d. 256/ 870). Al-Akhbār al-muwaffaqiyyāt.
Edited by Sāmī Makkī al-ʿĀnī. Beirut: Maṭbaʿat al-ʿĀnī, 1416/1996. Ibn
Barrāj (d. ca. 480/1088). Al-Muhadhdhab. Edited by Jaʿfar al-Subḥānī.
Qum: Muʾas- sasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1406/1986. Ibn Baṭṭah
(d. 387/997). Ibṭāl al-ḥiyal. Edited by Zuhayr al-Shāwīsh. Beirut:
al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1403/1983. Ibn Durayd (d. 321/933). Al-Amālī:
Taʿlīq min Amālī Ibn Durayd. Edited by Muṣṭafā al-Sanūsī. Kuwait:
al-Majlis al-Waṭanī li-l-Thaqāfah wa-l-Funūn wa-l-Ādāb, Qism al- Turāth
al-ʿArabī, 1984. Ibn Durayd (d. 321/933). Al-Ishtiqāq. Beirut: Dār
al-Jīl, 1411/1991. Ibn Durayd (d. 321/933). Jamharat al-lughah. Edited
by Ramzī Baʿlabakkī. Beirut: Dār al-ʿIlm li-l-Malāyīn, 1987. Ibn Durayd
(d. 321/933). Al-Mujtanā. Hyderabad: Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmāniyyah,
1963. Ibn al-Faqīh al-Hamadhānī (fl. 290/903). Kitāb al-Buldān. Edited
by Yūsuf al-Hādī. Beirut: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1416/1996. Ibn Fāris
al-Qazwīnī (d. 395/1004). Muʿjam Maqāyīs al-lughah. Edited by ʿAbd
al-Salām Muḥammad Hārūn. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1399/1979. Ibn Funduq
al-Bayhaqī, ʿAlī ibn Zayd Farīd-Khurāsān (d. 565/1170) (comm.). Maʿārij
Nahj al-balāghah. Edited by Muḥammad Taqī Dānishpazhūh. Qum: Maktabat
Āya- tallāh al-ʿUẓmā al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1409/1988. Ibn Ḥajar
al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1449). Lisān al-mīzān. Edited by ʿAbd al-FattāḥAbū
Ghadda. 10 vols. Beirut: Maktab al-Maṭbūʿāt al-Islāmiyyah, 1423/2002.
Ibn Ḥamdūn (d. 562/1166). Al-Tadhkirah al-Ḥamdūniyyah. Edited by Iḥsān
ʿAbbās. 10 vols. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1996. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
bibliography 921 Ibn Ḥanbal (d. 240/855). Faḍāʾil al-ṣaḥābah. Edited
byWaṣiyyallāh Muḥammad ʿAbbās. 2 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah,
1403/1983. Ibn Ḥanbal (d. 240/855). Al-ʿIlal wa maʿrifat al-rijāl.
Edited by Waṣiyyallāh ʿAbbās. Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1408/1988.
Ibn Ḥanbal (d. 240/855) (comp.). Musnad Aḥmad. Edited by Shuʿayb
al-Arnāʾūṭet al. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1421/2001. Ibn
Hibatallāh al-Afṭasī, Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad (d. after 515/1121).
Al-Majmūʿ al- lafīf: Mukhtārāt turāthiyyah fī l-adab wa-l-fikr
wa-l-ḥaḍārah. Edited by Yaḥyā Wahīb al-Jubūrī. Beirut: Dār al-Gharb
al-Islāmī, 2005. Ibn Ḥibbān (d. 354/965). Al-Thiqāt. 9 vols. Beirut:
Muʾassasat al-Kutub al-Thaqāfiyyah, 1393/1973. Ibn Hishām (d. 218/833)
from Ibn Isḥāq (d. 151/768). Al-Sīrah al-nabawiyyah. Edited by Aḥmad
Ḥijāzī al-Saqqā. 4 parts in 2 vols. Cairo: Dār al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, n.d.
Trans- lated by Alfred Guillaume as The Life of Muhammad: A Translation
of Isḥāq's Sīrat Rasūl Allāh. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1955. Ibn
al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201). Al-Mawḍūʿāt. Edited by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Muḥammad
ʿUth- mān. Medina: al-Maktabah al-Salafiyyah, 1386/1966. Ibn al-Jawzī
(d. 597/1201). Ṣifat al-ṣifwah. Edited by Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī. 2 vols. Cairo:
Dār al-Ḥadīth, 2000. Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201). Al-Tabṣirah. Edited by
Muṣṭafā ʿAbd al-Wāḥid. Beirut and Cairo: Dār al-Kitāb al-Lubnānī, 1970.
Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201). Zād al-masīr fī ʿilm al-tafsīr. Edited by
ʿAbd al-Razzāq al- Mahdī. Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1422/2002. Ibn
al-Jazarī, Shams al-Dīn Abū al-Khayr (d. 833/1429). Manāqib al-asad
al-ghālib ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. Edited by Ṭāriq al-Ṭanṭāwī. Cairo:
Maktabat al-Qurʾān, 1994. Ibn Kathīr (d. 774/1373). Al-Bidāyah
wa-l-nihāyah. Edited by ʿAlī Shīrī. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth
al-ʿArabī, 1408/1988. Ibn Kathīr (d. 774/1373). Qiṣaṣal-anbiyāʾ. Edited
by Muṣṭafā ʿAbd al-Wāḥid. Cairo: Dār al-Taʾlīf, 1388/1968. Ibn Kathīr
(d. 774/1373). Ṭabaqāt al-Shāfiʿiyyīn. Cairo: Maktabat al-Thaqāfah
al-Dīniy- yah, 1413/1993. Ibn Khālawayh (d. 370/980). Laysa fī kalām
al-ʿArab. Edited by Aḥmad ʿAbd al-Ghafūr ʿAṭṭār. Mecca: n.p., 1399/1979.
Ibn Khallikān (d. 681/1282).Wafayāt al-aʿyān wa-anbāʾ abnāʾ al-zamān.
Edited by Iḥsān ʿAbbās. 7 vols. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1994. Ibn
al-Maghāzilī (d. 483/1090). Manāqib al-Imām ʿAlī ibn AbīṬālib. Edited by
Jaʿfar Hādī al-Dajīlī. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1412/1992 Ibn Mājah
(d. 273/887) (comp.). Sunan Ibn Mājah. 2 vols. Edited by Muḥammad Fuʾād
ʿAbd al-Bāqī. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyyah, 1952--1953. Ibn
Mākūlā (d. 474/1082). Al-Ikmāl fī rafʿ al-irtiyāb ʿan al-muʾtalif
wa-l-mukhtalif fī l- al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 922 bibliography asmāʾ
wa-l-kunā wa-l-ansāb. Edited by Nāyif al-ʿAbbās. 6 vols. Cairo: Dār
al-Kitāb al-Islāmī, n.d. Ibn Manẓūr (d. 711/1311). Lisān al-ʿArab.
Edited by ʿAbdallāh ʿAlī̄ al-Kabīr et al. 2 vols. Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif,
1981. Ibn Mardawayh, Aḥmad ibn Mūsā (d. 410/1019). Manāqib ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib wa-mā nazala min al-Qurʾān fī ʿAlī. Edited by ʿAbd al-Razzāq
Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ḥirz al- Dīn. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1422/2001. Ibn
al-Mubārak (d. 181/797). Kitāb al-Zuhd. Edited by Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān
al-Aʿẓamī. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1970. Ibn Munqidh
(d. 584/1188). Lubāb al-ādāb. Edited by Aḥmad Shākir. Cairo: Maktabat
al-Sunnah, 1407/1987. Ibn al-Muʿtazz (d. 296/908). Al-Badīʿ fī l-badīʿ.
Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1410/1990. Ibn al-Nadīm (d. 380/990). Al-Fihrist.
Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1970s. Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah
(d. 751/1350). Ighāthat al-lahfān min maṣāyid al-shayṭān. Edited by
Muḥammad Ḥāmid al-Faqī. Riyadh: Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 1395/1975. Ibn
al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah (d. 751/1350). Iʿlām al-muwaqqiʿīn ʿan rabb
al-ʿālamīn. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Salām Ibrāhīm. Beirut: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1991. Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah (d. 751/1350).
Miftāḥdār al-saʿādah wa-manshūr walāyat al-ʿilm wa-l-irādah. 2 vols.
Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2005. Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276/889).
Gharīb al-ḥadīth. 3 vols. Edited by ʿAbdallāh al-Jubūrī. Beirut: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1408/1988. Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276/889) (attrib.).
Al-Imāmah wa-l-siyāsah. Edited by ʿAlī al-Shīrī. Qum: Manshūrāt
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, 1413/1992. IbnQutaybah(d.276/889).
IṣlāḥghalaṭAbīʿUbaydfīGharībal-ḥadīth.EditedbyʿAbdal- lāh al-Jubūrī.
Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1983. Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276/889). Taʾwīl
mukhtalif al-ḥadīth. Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1419/1999. Ibn
Qutaybah (d. 276/889). ʿUyūn al-akhbār. Edited by Mundhir Muḥammad Saʿīd
Abū Shaʿr. Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1429/2008. IbnRajab(d.795/1393).
Laṭāʾif al-maʿārif fī-māli-mawāsimal-ʿāmminal-waẓāʾif.Beirut: Dār Ibn
Ḥazm, 1424/2004. Ibn Rifāʿah (d. 932/1526). Kitāb al-Amthāl. Edited by
ʿAlī Ibrāhīm Kurdī. Damascus: Dār Saʿd al-Dīn, 2003. Ibn al-Ṣabbāgh
(d. ca. 854/1451). Al-Fuṣūl al-muhimmah fī maʿrifat al-aʾimmah. Edited
by Sāmī al-Gharīrī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1422/2002. Ibn Saʿd
(d. 230/845). Al-Ṭabaqāt al-kubrā. Edited by Iḥsān ʿAbbās. 8 vols.
Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1968. Ibn Shabbah, ʿUmar (d. 262/876). Tārīkh
al-Madīnah al-munawwarah. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1410/1989.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 923 Ibn
Shādhān, al-Faḍl (d. 260/873). Al-Īḍāḥ. Edited by Jalāl al-Dīn
al-Ḥusaynī Muḥad- dith. Tehran: Muʾassasah-i Intishārāt va Chāp-i
Dānishgāh-i Tihrān, 1363/1944. IbnShahrāshūb(d.588/1192).
ManāqibĀlAbīṬālib.Najaf:al-Maktabahal-Ḥaydariyyah, 1956. Ibn Taghrībirdī
(d. 874/1470). Al-Nujūm al-zāhirah: Fī Mulūk Miṣr wa-l-Qāhirah. Edited
byMuḥammadḤusaynShamsal-Dīn.16vols.Beirut:Dāral-Kutubal-ʿIlmiyyah,1992.
Ibn Ṭalḥah, Muḥammad (d. 652/1255). Maṭālib al-saʾūl fī āl al-rasūl.
Edited by Mājid ʿAṭiyyah. Beirut: Muʾassasat Umm al-Qurā, 1420/2000. Ibn
Ṭāwūs al-Ḥillī (d. 664/1266). Kashf al-maḥajjah li-thamarat al-muhjah.
Najaf: al- Maṭbaʿah al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1370/1950. IbnṬāwūs al-Ḥillī
(d. 664/1266). Faraj al-mahmūm fī tārīkh ʿulamāʾ al-nujūm. Qum: Dār
al-Dhakhāʾir, 1368/1949. Ibn Ṭāwūs al-Ḥillī (d. 664/1266). Muhaj
al-daʿawāt wa-manhaj al-ʿibādāt. Beirut: Muʾas- sasat al-Aʿlamī,
1414/1994. Ibn Ṭāwūs al-Ḥillī (d. 664/1266). Al-Ṭarāʾif fī maʿrifat
madhāhib al-ṭawāʾif. Edited by ʿAlī ʿĀshūr. 2 vols. Qum: Khayām,
1400/1980. IbnṬāwūsal-Ḥillī(d.664/1266).
Al-Yaqīnbi-khtiṣāṣmawlānāʿAlībi-imāratal-muʾminīn. Qum: Dār al-Kitāb
al-Jazāʾirī, 1413/1992. Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328). Minhāj al-sunnah
al-nabawiyyah: Fī Naqḍkalām al-shīʿah al-qadariyyah. Edited by Muḥammad
Rashād Sālim. 9 vols. Riyadh: Jāmiʿat al-Imām Muḥammad ibn Saʿūd
al-Islāmiyyah, 1986. Ibn al-Ṭuyūrī (d. 500/1106), abridged by Abū Ṭāhir
al-Silafī (d. 576/1180). Al-Ṭuyūriyyāt. Edited by DasmānYaḥyā Maʿālī and
ʿAbbās Ṣakhr al-Ḥasan. 4 vols. Riyadh: Maktabat Aḍwāʾ al-Salaf, 2004.
Ibn al-Ẓahīr, al-Irbilī (d. 677/1278). Mukhtaṣar Amthāl al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī. Edited by Nūrī al-Qaysī and Hilāl Nājī. Baghdad: Dār al-Shuʾūn
al-Thaqāfiyyah al-ʿĀmmah, 1986. Idrīs ʿImād al-Dīn (d. 872/1468). ʿUyūn
al-akhbār wa-funūn al-āthār fī dhikr al-nabī al-
muṣṭafāl-mukhtārwa-waṣiyyihiʿAlīibnAbīṬālibqātilal-kuffārwa-ālihimāl-aʾimmah
al-aṭhār ʿalayhim ṣalawāt Allāh al-ʿazīz al-ghaffār. Edited by Ahmad
Chleilat et al. 7 vols. London and Damascus: Institut français du
Proche-Orient, and The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2007--2010.
al-ʿIjlī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Kūfī (d. 261/875). Maʿrifat al-thiqāt
min rijāl ahl al-ʿilm wa-l-ḥadīth wa-min al-ḍuʿafāʾ wa-dhikr
madhāhibihim wa-akhbārihim. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAlīm ʿAbd al-ʿAẓīm
al-Bastawī. 2 vols. Medina: Maktabat al-Dār, 1405/1985.
Ilāhī-Ardabīlī,ḤusaynibnʿAbdal-Ḥaqq(fl.ca.9th/15thc.)(comm.).
Manhajal-faṣāḥah: Fī SharḥNahj al-balāghah. Edited by Ilāhah Rūḥī Dil.
Mashhad: Bunyād-i Pizhush- hā-yi Islāmī Āstān-i Quds-i Riḍawī, 1972.
Imruʾ al-Qays (d. ca. 550ad). Dīwān. Edited by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān
al-Muṣṭāwī. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 2004. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 924
bibliography al-Irbilī, Bahāʾ al-Dīn ʿAlī ibn ʿĪsā (d. 692/1293). Kashf
al-ghummah fī maʿrifat al- aʾimmah. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1405/1985.
Isḥāq ibn Ibrāhīm al-Kātib (fl. 4th/10th c.). Al-Burhān fī wujūh
al-bayān. Cairo: Makta- bat al-Shabāb, 1979. al-Iskāfī, Muḥammad ibn
ʿAbdallāh (d. 240/854). Al-Miʿyār wa-l-muwāzanah: Fī Faḍāʾil al-Imām
Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib wa-bayān afḍaliyyatihi ʿalā jamīʿ
al- ʿālamīn baʿd al-anbiyāʾ wa-l-mursalīn. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir
al-Maḥmūdī. Beirut: Dār Maḥmūdī, 1981. al-Iskāfī, Muḥammad ibn Hammām
(d. 336/947). Kitāb al-Tamḥīṣ. Qum: Madrasat al- Imām al-Mahdī, n.d.
al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869). Al-Bayān wa-l-tabyīn. Edited by ʿAbd al-Salām
Muḥammad Hā- rūn. 4 parts in 2 vols. Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1985.
al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869). Kitāb al-Bukhalāʾ. Beirut: Dār wa-Maktabat
al-Hilāl, 1419/1999. al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869). Kitāb al-Ḥayawān. Edited by
ʿAbd al-Salām Muḥammad Hārūn. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1996.
al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869). Kitāb al-Maḥāsin wa-l-aḍdād. Beirut: Dār
wa-Maktabat al-Hilāl, 1423/2003. al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869) (comp.). Miʾat
kalimah. In al-Quḍāʿī, ATreasury of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and
Teachings of ʿAlī with the One Hundred Proverbs Attributed to al-Jāḥiẓ.
Edited and translated by Tahera Qutbuddin. New York: New York University
Press, 2013, pp. 219--233. al-Jāḥiẓ(d. 255/869). Al-ʿUthmāniyyah. Edited
by ʿAbd al-Salām Muḥammad Hārūn. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1411/1991.
al-Jahshiyārī, Muḥammad ibn ʿAbdūs (d. 331/942). Kitāb al-Wuzarāʾ
wa-l-kuttāb. Edited by Muṣṭafā al-Saqqā et al. Cairo: Muṣṭafā al-Bābī
al-Ḥalabī, 1980. al-Jarīrī, al-Muʿāfā ibn Zakariyyā (d. 390/1000).
Al-Jalīs al-ṣāliḥal-kāfī wa-l-anīs al-nāṣiḥ al-shāfī. Edited by ʿAbd
al-Karīm Sāmī al-Jundī. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1426/2005.
al-Jaṣṣāṣ, Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī al-Rāzī (d. 370/981). Aḥkām al-Qurʾān. Edited
by ʿAbd al-Salām Muḥammad ʿAlī Shāhīn. 3 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub
al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1415/1994. al-Jawharī (d. between 393/1003 and 400/1010).
Al-Ṣiḥāḥ: Tāj al-lughah wa-ṣiḥāḥal- ʿarabiyyah. Edited by Aḥmad ʿAbd
al-Ghafūr ʿAṭṭār. 6 vols. Beirut: Dār al-ʿIlm li-l- Malāyīn, 1407/1987.
al-Jīlānī, Niẓām al-Dīn (d. 1053/1643) (comm.). Anwār al-faṣāḥah
wa-asrār al-barāʿah: SharḥNahj al-balāghah. ms. Dubai, Juma al-Majid
Center for Culture and Heritage, catalog no. ms 339694. al-Jurjānī, ʿAbd
al-Qāhir (d. ca. 474/1081). Asrār al-balāghah. Edited by Maḥmūd Mu-
ḥammad Shākir. Cairo and Jeddah: Dār al-Madanī, 1991. al-Karājikī,
Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī (d. 449/1058). Kanz al-fawāʾid. Qum: Maktabat al-
Muṣṭafawī, 1369/1949. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 925
al-Karājikī, Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī (d. 449/1058). Maʿdin al-jawāhir
wa-riyāḍat al-khawā- ṭir. Edited by Aḥmad al-Ḥusaynī. Tehran:
al-Maktabah al-Murtaḍawiyyah, 1394/ 1973. al-Karājikī, Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī
(d. 449/1058). Al-Taʿajjub min aghlāṭal-ʿāmmah fī masʾalat al-imāmah.
Edited by Fāris Ḥassūn Karīm. Qum: Dār al-Ghadīr, 2000. al-Kashshī,
Muḥammad ibn ʿUmar (d. 340/952). Rijāl al-Kashshī. Abridged by al-Ṭūsī
(d. 460/1067) as Ikhtiyār maʿrifat al-rijāl. Qum: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt,
1404/1984. al-Kaydarī, Quṭb al-Dīn al-Bayhaqī (d. after 576/1180)
(comp.). Dīwān al-Imām ʿAlī, or Anwār al-ʿuqūl min ashʿār waṣī al-rasūl.
Edited by Kāmil Salmān al-Jubūrī. Beirut: Dār al-Maḥajjah al-Bayḍāʾ,
1999. al-Kaydarī, Quṭb al-Dīn al-Bayhaqī (d. after 576/1180) (comm.).
Ḥadāʾiq al-ḥaqāʾiq: Fī SharḥNahj al-balāghah. 2 vols. Edited by
ʿAzīzallāh al-ʿUṭāridī. Tehran: Muʾassasat Nahj al-Balāghah, 1996.
al-Khalīl ibn Aḥmad al-Farāhīdī (d. ca. 160/776). Kitāb al-ʿAyn. Edited
by Mahdī al- Makhzūmī and Ibrāhīm al-Sāmarrāʾī. 8 vols. Cairo: Dār
wa-Maktabat al-Hilāl, n.d. al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071).
Al-Riḥlah fī ṭalab al-ḥadīth. Edited by Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr. Beirut: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1395/1975. al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071).
Tārīkh Baghdād. Edited by Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿ- rūf. Beirut: Dār al-Gharb
al-Islāmī, 1422/2002. al-Khazzāz, ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Qummī
(fl. 4th/10th c.). Kifāyat al-athar fī l-nuṣūṣ ʿalā l-aʾimmah al-ithnay
ʿashar. Qum: Intishārāt-i Bīdār, 1410/1990. al-Khwārazmī, Abū Bakr
(d. 383/993). Al-Amthāl al-muwalladah. Abu Dhabi: al-Majmaʿ al-Thaqāfī,
1424/2004. al-Khwārazmī, al-Muwaffaq ibn Aḥmad al-Bakrī (d. 568/1173).
Al-Manāqib. Edited by Mālik al-Maḥmūdī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr
al-Islāmī, 1414/1993. al-Kūfī, Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān (fl. 4th/10th c.).
Manāqib al-Imām Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. Edited by Muḥammad
Bāqir al-Maḥmūdī. Qum: Majmaʿ Iḥyāʾ al- Thaqāfah al-Islāmiyyah,
1412/1991. al-Kulaynī (d. 329/941). Al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar
al-Ghaffārī. 8 vols. Tehran: Dār al- Kutub al-Islāmiyyah,
1377--1381/1957--1961. al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Bāqir (d. 1110/1699). Biḥār
al-anwār. 110 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1987.
al-Makkī,AbūṬālibMuḥammad(d.386/996).Qūtal-qulūbfīmuʿāmalatal-maḥbūbwa-
waṣf ṭarīq al-murīd ilā maqam al-tawḥīd. Edited by ʿĀṣim Ibrāhīm
al-Kayyālī. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1426/2005.
al-Māmaṭīrī, Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn Mahdī al-Ṭabarī (d. ca. 360/971).
Nuzhat al-abṣār wa-maḥāsin al-āthār. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir
al-Maḥmūdī. Tehran: Markaz al- Taḥqīqāt wa-l-Dirāsāt al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2009.
al-Masʿūdī (d. 345/956). Ithbāt al-waṣiyyah li-Imam ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib.
Najaf: al-Maṭbaʿah al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1955. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 926
bibliography al-Masʿūdī (d. 345/956). Murūj al-dhahab wa-maʿādin
al-jawhar. Edited by Saʿīd al- Laḥḥām. 5 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr,
2000. al-Māwardī (d. 450/1058). Adab al-dunyā wa-l-dīn. Beirut: Dār
Maktabat al-Ḥayāt, 1986. al-Māwardī (d. 450/1058). Aʿlām al-nubuwwah.
Beirut: Dār wa-Maktabat al-Hilāl, 1409/ 1989. al-Māwardī (d. 450/1058).
Al-Amthāl. Edited by Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Munʿim Aḥmad. Riyadh: Dār al-Waṭan,
1420/1999. al-Māwardī (d. 450/1058). Al-Ḥāwī al-kabīr fī fiqh madhhab
al-Imām al-Shāfiʿī wa-huwa SharḥMukhtaṣar al-Muzanī. Edited by ʿAlī
Muḥammad Muʿawwaḍ. 19 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1999.
al-Maydānī (d. 518/1124). Majmaʿ al-amthāl. Edited by Muḥammad Muḥyī
al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd. 2 vols. Cairo: al-Maktabah al-Tijāriyyah al-Kubrā,
1379/1959. al-Minqarī, Naṣr ibn Muzāḥim (d. 212/827). Waqʿat Ṣiffīn.
Edited by ʿAbd al-Salām Muḥammad Hārūn. Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1981.
Miskawayh, ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad (d. 421/1030). Tajārib al-umam wa-taʿāqub
al-himam. Edited by Abū al-Qāsim Imāmī. 7 vols. Tehran: Dār Surūsh,
2000. al-Mizzī, Yūsuf ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Jamāl al-Dīn (d. 742/1341).
Tahdhīb al-Kamāl fī asmāʾ al-rijāl. Edited by Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf. 35
vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al- Risālah, 1980--1992. al-Muʾaddib, ʿAlī ibn
Muḥammad (fl. 5th/11th c.). ʿUyūn al-ḥikam wa-l-mawāʿiẓ. Edited by
Ḥusayn al-Ḥasanī al-Bīrjandī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1418/1997. al-Muʾayyad
bi-llāh Yaḥyâ ibn Ḥamzah (d. ca. 749/1348) (comm.). Al-Dībāj al-waḍī fī
l- kashf ʿan asrār al-waṣī: SharḥNahj al-balāghah. Edited by Khālid
Qāsim al-Mutawakkil. 6 vols. Sanaa: Muʾassasat al-Imām Zayd ibn ʿAlī
al-Thaqāfiyyah, 2003. al-Muʾayyad bi-llāh Yaḥyā ibn Ḥamzah (d. ca.
749/1348). Al-Ṭirāz li-asrār al-balāghah wa-ʿulūm ḥaqāʾiq al-iʿjāz. 3
vols. Beirut: al-Maktabah al-ʿUnṣuriyyah, 1423/2003.
al-Muʾayyadfīl-Dīnal-Shīrāzī(d.470/1078).
Al-Majālisal-Muʾayyadiyya.8vols.Vols.1--4 edited by Ḥātim Ḥamīd al-Dīn.
Bombay and Oxford: Oxford Printers. 1975--2011. al-Mubarrad
(d. 286/899). Al-Fāḍil. Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣriyyah, 1421/2001.
al-Mubarrad (d. 286/899). Al-Kāmil fī l-lughah wa-l-adab. Edited by
Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1417/1997.
Mufaḍḍal ibn Salamah al-Kūfī (d. after 290/903), Al-Fākhir fī l-amthāl.
Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAlīm al-Ṭaḥāwī. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub
al-ʿArabiyyah ʿĪsā al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī, 1380/1960. al-Mufīd (d. 413/1023).
Amālī al-Mufīd. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar al-Ghaffārī. Qum: Manshū- rāt
Jamāʿat al-Mudarrisīn fī l-Ḥawzah al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1982. al-Mufīd
(d. 413/1023). Al-Ifṣāḥfī l-imāmah. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Biʿthah, n.d.
al-Mufīd (d. 413/1023). Al-Ikhtiṣāṣ. Qum: Manshūrāt Jamāʿat
al-Mudarrisīn fī l-Ḥawzah al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1980. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
bibliography 927 al-Mufīd (d. 413/1023). Al-Irshād fī maʿrifat ḥujaj
Allāh ʿalā l-ʿibād. Mashhad: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth,
n.d. al-Mufīd (d. 413/1023). Kitāb al-Jamal. Najaf: al-Maṭbaʿah
al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1983. al-Mufīd (d. 413/1023). Al-Kāfiyah fī ibṭāl tawbat
al-khāṭiyah. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar Za mānī Nizād. Qum: al-Muʾtamar
al-ʿĀlamī li-Alfiyyat al-Shaykh al-Mufīd, 1413/1993. al-Mufīd
(d. 413/1023). Al-Muqniʿah. Qum: Dār al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1410/1990.
al-Muhallabī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī (d. 644/1246). Al-Maʾākhidh ʿalā
shurrāḥDīwān Abī al- Ṭayyib al-Mutanabbī. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn
Nāṣir al-Māniʿ. Riyadh: Markaz al-Malik Fayṣal li-l-Buḥūth wa-al-Dirāsāt
al-Islāmiyyah, 1424/2003. Muḥammad, Prophet of Islam (d. 11/632),
attrib. Medieval compilations of hadith listed under the compiler's
name: ʿAbd al-Razzāq, Abū ʿUbayd, Abū Yaʿlā, Abū Bakr al- Bayhaqī,
Dāraquṭnī, Dārimī, Harawī, Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim, Ibn Abī Shaybah, Majd Ibn al-
Athīr, Ibn Ḥanbal, Ibn Mājah, Ibn Qutaybah, Muslim, Nasāʾī, Nuʿmān,
Quḍāʿī, Raḍī, ʿImād al-Ṭabarī, and Tirmidhī. Muḥammad ibn Ḥabīb
(d. 245/860). Asmāʾ al-mughtālīn min al-ashrāf fī l-jāhiliyyah
wa-l-Islām. Edited by Kasrawī Ḥasan. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah,
1422/2001. Muḥammad ibn Ṭāhir al-Ḥārithī (d. 584/1188). Majmūʿ
al-tarbiyah. Edited by Ḥusām Khaddūr. Salamiyya, Syria: Dār al-Ghadīr,
2019. al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf (436/1044). Al-Amālī. Edited by Muḥammad Abū
al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. 2 vols. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyyah,
1373/1954. al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf (436/1044). Rasāʾil. Edited by Mahdī
al-Rajāʾī. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Nūr, 1405/1984. al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf
(436/1044). Tanzīh al-anbiyāʾ. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1409/1989. Muslim
ibn Ḥajjāj (d. 261/875) (comp.). Al-Musnad al-ṣaḥīḥ. Edited by Muḥammad
Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī. 5 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1970.
al-Muttaqī al-Hindī, ʿAlī ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (d. 975/1567). Kanz
al-ʿummāl fī sunan al- aqwāl wa-l-afʿāl. 18 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat
al-Risālah, 1989. al-Muwaffaq biʾllāh, al-Ḥusayn ibn Ismāʿīl al-Zaydī
al-Jurjānī (d. ca. 430/1038). Al-Iʿtibār wa-sulwat al-ʿārifīn. Edited by
ʿAbd al-Salām ʿAbbās al-Wajīh. Sanaa: Muʾassasat al- Imām Zayd ibn ʿAlī
al-Thaqāfiyyah, 2008. al-Naḥḥās, Abū Jaʿfar (d. 338/950). ʿUmdat
al-kātib. Edited by Bassām ʿAbd al-Wahhāb Jābī. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm,
1425/2005. al-Najāshī (d. after 463/1071). Rijāl al-Najāshī. Edited by
Mūsā al-Shubayrī al-Zanjānī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī
al-Tābiʿah li-Jamāʿat al-Mudarrisīn, 1986. Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī
(d. 672/1274). Rawḍah-yi taslīm. Edited and translated by Jalal Hos-
seiniBadakhchanias Paradiseof
Submission.AMedievalTreatiseonIsmailiThought. London: I.B. Tauris, 2005.
Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī (d. 672/1274). Tawallā wa-tabarrā, Maṭlūb
al-muʾminīn, and Āghāz wa-anjām. Edited and translated by Jalal Hosseini
Badakhchani as Shīʿī Interpreta- tions of Islam.ThreeTreatises
onTheology and Eschatology. London: I.B.Tauris, 2010. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 928 bibliography
Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād al-Khuzāʿī al-Marwazī (d. 228/843). Kitāb al-Fitan.
Edited by Samīr Amīn al-Zuhayrī. 2 vols. Cairo: Maktabat al-Tawḥīd,
1414/1992. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī (d. 363/974). Asās al-taʾwīl. Edited by
ʿĀrif Tāmir. Beirut: Dār al- Thaqāfah, 1960. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī
(d. 363/974). Daʿāʾim al-Islām wa-dhikr al-ḥalāl wa-l-ḥarām wa-l- qaḍāyā
wa-l-aḥkām ʿan ahl bayt Rasūl Allāh. Edited by Asaf Fyzee. 2 vols.
Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, 1951--1961. Translated by Asaf Fyzee and Ismail
Poonawala as The Pillars of Islam. 2 vols. Oxford and New Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 2002. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī (d. 363/974). Ikhtilāf uṣūl
al-madhāhib. Edited and translated by Devin J. Stewart as Disagreements
of the Jurists: A Manual of Islamic Legal Theory. New York: New York
University Press, 2015. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī (d. 363/974). Al-Majālis
wa-l-musāyarāt. Edited by Ḥabīb al-Faqī, Ibrāhīm Shabbūḥ, and Muḥammad
Yaʿlāwī. Beirut: Dar al-Muntaẓar, 1996. al-Nuʿmān,al-Qāḍī(d.363/974).
Al-Manāqibwa-l-mathālib.EditedbyMājidibnAḥmad al-ʿAṭiyyah. Beirut:
Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 2002. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī (d. 363/974).
Sharḥal-akhbār. 16 parts in 4 vols. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī,
1991. al-Nuʿmān, al-Qāḍī (d. 363/974) (comp. and comm.). Kitāb al-Tawḥīd
min khuṭab amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn AbīṬālib. Edited by ʿAbd al-Razzāq
Muḥammad, in Al-Kalām al- Ismāʿīlī: Khamsat kutub Ismāʿīliyyah fī
l-tawḥīd wa-l-bāṭin wa-mukāsarat al-aḍdād. Cairo: Markaz Iḥyāʾ
li-l-Buḥūth wa-l-Dirāsāt, 2021, 36--212. al-Nuwayrī (d. 733/1333).
Nihāyat al-arab fī funūn al-adab. Edited by Saʿīd ʿĀshūr. 33 vols.
Cairo: Dār al-Kutub wa-l-Wathāʾiq al-Qawmiyyah, 1423/2002 al-Qālī
(d. 356/967). Al-Amālī. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Jawād al-Aṣmaʿī.
Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣriyyah, 1344/1926. al-Qālī (d. 356/967). Dhayl
al-Amālī wa-l-nawādir. Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣriyyah, 1344/1926.
al-Qalqashandī (d. 821/1418). Ṣubḥal-aʿshā fī ṣināʿat al-inshā. 15 vols.
Beirut: Dār al- Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2012. al-Qāsimī, Ḥumaydān ibn Yaḥyā
(d. 656/1258). Majmūʿ Rasāʾil fī uṣūl al-tafsīr wa-uṣūl al-fiqh. Saada,
Yemen: Markaz Ahl al-Bayt li-l-Dirāsāt al-Islāmiyyah, 2003. al-Quḍāʿī,
al-Qāḍī Muḥammad ibn Salāmah (d. 454/1062) (comp.). Dustūr maʿālim al-
ḥikam wa-maʾthūr makārim al-shiyam. Edited and translated by Tahera
Qutbuddin as A Treasury of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and Teachings of
ʿAlī with the One Hun- dred Proverbs Attributed to al-Jāḥiẓ. New York:
New York University Press, Library of Arabic Literature series, 2013.
al-Quḍāʿī, al-Qāḍī Muḥammad ibn Salāmah (d. 454/1062) (comp.). Kitāb
al-Shihāb. Edited and translated by Tahera Qutbuddin as Light in the
Heavens: Sayings of the Prophet Muhammad. New York: New York University
Press, Library of Arabic Litera- ture series, 2016. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
bibliography 929 al-Quḍāʿī, al-Qāḍī Muḥammad ibn Salāmah (d. 454/1062).
Musnad al-Shihāb. Edited by Ḥamdī al-Salafī. 2 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat
al-Risālah, 1407/1986. al-Qummī, ʿAlī ibn Ibrāhīm (d. after 307/919)
(comm.). Tafsīr al-Qummī. 2 vols. Edited by Ṭayyib al-Jazāʾirī. Qum:
Muʾassasat Dār al-Kitāb, 1404/1984. al-Qurṭubī, Muḥammad (d. 671/1212)
(comm.). Al-Jāmiʿ li-aḥkām al-Qurʾān, or Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī. 20 vols.
Edited by Aḥmad ʿAbd al-ʿAlīm al-Bardūnī. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al- Turāth
al-ʿArabī, 1405/1985. al-Raḍī, al-Sharīf (d. 406/1015). Dīwān. Edited by
Muḥammad Muḥyī al-Dīn ʿAbd al- Ḥamīd as SharḥDīwān al-Sharīf al-Raḍī. 2
vols. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiy- yah, 1949. al-Raḍī,
al-Sharīf (d. 406/1015) (comm.). Ḥaqāʾiq al-taʾwīl fī mutashābih
al-tanzīl. Vol. 5 edited by Muḥammad al-Riḍā Āl Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ.
Beirut: Dār al-Muhājir, 1960s. al-Raḍī, al-Sharīf (d. 406/1015).
KhaṣāʾiṣAmīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. Beirut: Muʾassasat
al-Aʿlamî, 1986. al-Raḍī, al-Sharīf (d. 406/1015). Al-Majāzāt
al-nabawiyyah. Edited by Ṭāhā Muḥammad al-Zaytī. Cairo: Muʾassasat
al-Ḥalabī, 1387/1967. Abridged in Persian by Muḥammad Mahdī Jaʿfarīas
Āfarīnish-hā-yi hunarīdar guftār-inabawī.Tehran:Mīrāthbān,2007. al-Raḍī,
al-Sharīf (d. 406/1015) (comp.). Nahj al-balāghah. Present volume.
Edited ear- lier by Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Jalālī. 2 vols., n.p., 1422/2002.
Edited by Qays Bahjat ʿAṭṭār. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Rāfid, 2010. Edited by
Hāshim Mīlānī. Najaf: al-ʿAtabah al-ʿAlawiyyah al-Muqaddasah, 2009.
Translated into Persian by Mullā Fatḥallāh Kāshānī (d. 988/1580) as
Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn wa-tadhkirat al-ʿārifīn fī l-sharḥal-Fārisī li-Nahj
al-balāghah. Tehran: n.p., 1888. Extant medieval commentaries by
Sarakhsī, Ibn Funduq, Rāwandī, Kaydarī, Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, Baḥrānī,
al-Muʾayyad bi-llāh, Ilāhī-
Ardabīlī,ʿAbdal-Bāqī,andJīlānīarelistedunderthecompiler'sname,asaremodern
commentaries by ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd, ʿAbduh, Jalālī, Lāhījānī, Mughniyyah,
al-Marṣafī, Naqavī, Ṭāliqānī, and Tustarī, and index volumes by Bayḍūn,
Muḥammad, and Muḥammadī and Dashtī. Translated into Persian by ʿAlī Naqī
Fayḍal-Islām as Tar- jamah va sharḥNahj al-balāghah. Tehran: n.p., 1946.
Translated into Turkish by Abdülbâki Gölpınarlı as Nehc'ül Belâga: Hz.
Alî'nin hutbeleri, vasiyyetleri, emirleri, mektupları, hikmet ve
vecizeleri: metnin terceme ve şerhi. Istanbul: Neşriyat Yurdu, 1972.
Translated into Persian by Muḥammad Taqī-Jaʿfarī as Tarjamah va tafsīr-i
Nahj al-balāghah. Tehran: Farhang-i Islāmī, 1978. Translated into French
by Attia Abul Naga as La voie de l'éloquence. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub
al-Islāmiyyah, 1986. Cairo: Dār al- Kitāb al-Miṣrī, 1986. Translated
into Spanish by Mohammed ʿAlí Anzaldúa-Morales as La cumbre de la
elocuencia: Sermones, cartas y dichos de Imam Alí ibn Abi Talib,
Elmhurst, NY: Tahrike Tarsile Quran, 1988. Sayings section partially
translated into English by Thomas Cleary as Living and Dying with Grace.
Counsels of Ḥaḍrat ʿAlī. Boston: Shambhala, 1996. Translated into Urdu
by Dhīshān Ḥaydar Jawādī as Nahj al-balāghah. Karachi: MaḥfūẓBook
Agency, 1999. Translated into French by Leila al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 930
bibliography Sourani as Sagesses de l'Imam ʿAli: Tirées de Nahj al
Balaghat. Beirut: Albouraq, 2001. Translated into Chinese by Zhihua
Zhang as Ci zhang zhi dao: Yimamuali Ben Aibi Talibo yan lun ji.
Beijing: Zong jiao wen hua chu ban she, 2003. Translated into Urdu by
Mufti Jaʿfar Ḥusayn as Nahj al-balāghah. Lahore: al-Miʿrāj Company,
2003. Translated into German by Fatima Özoguz as Nahdsch-ul-Balagha.
Pfad der Eloquenz: Aussagen und Reden Imam Alis. 2 vols. Bremen:
M-haditec, 2007. Trans- lated into Russian by AbdulkarimTaras
Cherniyenko as Put' krasnorechiya. Moscow: Vostochnaya Literature, 2008.
(Among several other translations into various lan- guages).1
al-Raḍī,al-Sharīf
(d.406/1015).Talkhīṣal-bayānfīmajāzātal-Qurʾān.EditedbyMuḥam- mad
al-Mishkāt, Tehran 1953. Translated into Persian by Muḥammad Bāqir
Sabza- vārī. Tehran: Chāpkhānah-i Dānishgāh, 1951. al-Raḍī, al-Sharīf
(d. 406/1015) and Hilāl al-Ṣābī (d. 448/1056). Rasāʾil al-Ṣābī
wa-l-Sharīf al-Raḍī. Edited by Muḥammad Yūsuf Najm. Kuwait: Dāʾirat
al-Maṭbūʿāt wa-l-Nashr, 1961. al-Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī (d. early 5th/11th
c.). Kitāb Mufradāt fī gharīb al-Qurʾān. Edited by Ṣafwān ʿAdnān
al-Dāʾūdī. Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 1412/1992. al-Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī
(d. early 5th/11th c.). Muḥāḍarāt al-udabāʾ wa-muḥāwarāt al- shuʿarāʾ
wa-l-bulaghāʾ. 2 vols. Edited by ʿUmar Ṭabbāʿ. Beirut: Dār al-Arqam,
1420/ 2000. al-Rāwandī, Faḍlallāh ibn ʿAlī (d. 571/1175). Kitāb
al-Nawādir. Edited by Saʿīd ʿAskarī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1956.
al-Rāwandī, Quṭb al-Dīn (d. 573/1177). Al-Daʿawāt, or Salwat al-ḥazīn.
Qum: Madrasat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1987. al-Rāwandī, Quṭb al-Dīn
(d. 573/1177). Fiqh al-Qurʾān. Edited by Aḥmad al-Ḥusaynī. Qum: Maktabat
Āyatallāh al-ʿUẓmā al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1404/1984. al-Rāwandī, Quṭb
al-Dīn (d. 573/1177). Al-Kharāʾij wa-l-jarāʾiḥ. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir
al-Muwaḥḥid al-Abṭaḥī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1409/1989.
al-Rāwandī, Quṭb al-Dīn (d. 573/1177) (comm.). Minhāj al-barāʿah: Fī
SharḥNahj al- balāghah. Edited by ʿAbd Laṭīf al-Kūhkamarī. 3 vols. Qum:
Maktabat Āyatallāh al- Marʿashī̄al-ʿĀmmah, 1986. al-Rāzī, Fakhr al-Dīn
(d. 606/1210) (comm.). Mafātīḥal-ghayb, or Tafsīr al-Rāzī. 32 vols.
Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1420/2000. al-Rāzī, Fakhr al-Dīn
(d. 606/1210). Al-Maḥṣūl. Edited by Ṭāhā Jābir Fayyāḍal-ʿAlwānī. Beirut:
Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1418/1997. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh
(d. 381/991). Al-Amālī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Biʿthah, 1417/1997. 1 For a
fuller list of Nahj al-balāghah translations, see Esḥāqī,
"Manbaʿ-shināsī,"passim. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 931
al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991). Al-Hidāyah. Qum:
Muʾassasat al-Imām al-Hādī, 1418/1998. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh
(d. 381/991). ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ. Edited by Muḥammad Ṣādiq Baḥr al-ʿUlūm.
Najaf: al-Maktabah al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1385/1966. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn
Bābawayh (d. 381/991). Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿmah. Qum: Muʾassasat
al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1405/1985. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh
(d. 381/991). Al-Khiṣāl. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar al- Ghaffārī. Qum:
Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1403/1982. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn
Bābawayh (d. 381/991). Maʿānī al-akhbār. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar
al-Ghaffārī. Najaf: Maṭbaʿat al-Ḥaydarī, 1379/1960. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī,
Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991). Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh. Edited by ʿAlī
Akbar al-Ghaffārī. 4 vols. Manshūrāt Jamāʿat al-Mudarrisīn fī l-Ḥawzah
al- ʿIlmiyyah, 1404/1983. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991).
Ṣifāt al-shīʿah wa-faḍāʾil al-shīʿah. Tehran: Kānūn-i Intishārāt-i
ʿĀbidī, 1970. al-Ṣadūq al-Qummī, Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991). Al-Tawḥīd.
Edited by Hāshim al-Ḥu- saynī al-Ṭihrānī. Qum: Manshūrāt Jamāʿat
al-Mudarrisīn fī l-Ḥawzah al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1363/1943.
al-Ṣadūqal-Qummī,IbnBābawayh(d.381/991).ʿUyūnakhbāral-Riḍā.EditedbyḤusayn
al-Aʿlamī. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1404/1983. al-Ṣafadī
(d. 764/1362). Al-Wāfī bi-l-Wafayāt. Edited by Aḥmad al-Arnāʾūṭand Turkī
Muṣṭafā. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 2000. al-Ṣaffār, Muḥammad ibn
al-Ḥasan al-Qummī (d. 290/902). Baṣāʾir al-darajāt fī faḍāʾil Āl
Muḥammad. Edited by Muḥsin Kūchahʾbāghī. Qum: Maktabat Āyatallāh al-ʿUẓ-
mā al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1983. al-Samʿānī, ʿAbd al-Karīm ibn Muḥammad
(d. 562/1166). Kitāb al-Ansāb. Edited by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Yaḥyā
al-Muʿallimī al-Yamānī. Hyderabad: Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al- ʿUthmāniyyah,
1382/1962. al-Samʿānī, ʿAbd al-Karīm ibn Muḥammad (d. 562/1166) (comm.).
Tafsīr al-Qurʾān. Edited by Yāsir ibn Ibrāhīm and Ghanīm ibn ʿAbbās ibn
Ghanīm. Riyadh: Dār al- Waṭan, 1418/1997.
al-Samarqandī,Abūal-LaythNaṣribnMuḥammad(d.375/985)(comm.).
Baḥral-ʿulūm, or Tafsīr al-Samarqandī. Edited by ʿAlī Muḥammad
Muʿāwwaḍet al. 3 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1993.
al-Sarakhsī, ʿAlī ibn Nāṣir (fl. 6th/12th c.) (comm.). Aʿlām Nahj
al-balāghah. Edited by ʿAbd ʿAzīz al-ʿUṭāridī. Qum: Muʾassasat
al-Ṭibāʿah wa-l-Nashr Wizārat al-Thaqāfah wa-l-Irshād al-Islāmī Dār
ʿUṭārid, 1996. al-Shāfiʿī (d. 204/820). Kitāb al-Umm. 8 vols. Beirut:
Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1410/1990. al-Shahrastānī (d. 548/1153).
Mafātīḥal-asrār wa-maṣābīḥal-abrār, or Tafsīr al-Shahra- stānī, Edited
by Muḥammad ʿAlī Ādharshab. 2 vols. Tehran: Markaz al-Buḥūth wa-l-
Dirāsāt li-l-Turāth al-Makhṭūṭ, 2008. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 932
bibliography al-Shahrastānī (d. 548/1153). Al-Milal wa-l-niḥal. Edited
by Muḥammad Gīlānī. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1414/1993. SibṭIbn al-Jawzī
(d. 654/1256).Tadhkirat al-khawāṣṣ. Edited by Muḥammad Ṣādiq Baḥr
al-ʿUlūm. Najaf: al-Maṭbaʿah al-Ḥaydariyyah, 1383/1964. al-Sukkarī
(d. 275/888) (comm.). SharḥAshʿār al-Hudhaliyyīn. Edited by ʿAbd
al-Sattār Farrāj with Maḥmūd Muḥammad Shākir. Cairo: Maktabat Dār
al-ʿUrūbah, 1965. Sulaym ibn Qays (d. 76/695), attrib., most likely an
early 2nd/8th c. text, Kitāb Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilālī. Edited by
Muḥammad Bāqir al-Anṣārī. 3 vols. Qum: Maṭbaʿat al- Hādī, 2000. al-Ṣūlī,
Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyā (d. 335/946). Adab al-kuttāb. Edited by Mu-
ḥammad Bahjat al-Atharī. Baghdad: al-Maktabah al-ʿArabiyyah, 1922.
al-Suyūṭī (d. 911/1505) (comp.). Jāmʿ al-jawāmiʿ, or al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr.
Edited by Mukhtār Ibrāhīm al-Hāʾij et al. 25 vols. Cairo: al-Azhar
al-Sharīf, 2005. al-Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān (d. 360/971).
Al-Muʿjam al-awsaṭ. Edited by Ṭāriq
ibnʿAwaḍallāhandʿAbdal-MuḥsinibnIbrāhīmal-Ḥusaynī.Cairo:Dāral-Ḥaramayn,
1995. al-Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān (d. 360/971). Al-Muʿjam
al-kabīr. Edited by Ḥamdī ibn ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Salafī. 25 vols. Cairo:
Maktabat Ibn Taymiyyah, 1415/1994. al-Ṭabarī al-Āmulī, Muḥammad ibn
Jarīr ibn Rustam (d. 411/1021). Dalāʾil al-imāmah. Qum: Muʾassasat
al-Biʿthah, 1413/1992. al-Ṭabarī al-Āmulī, Muḥammad ibn Jarīr ibn Rustam
(d. 411/1021). Al-Mustarshid fī imā- mat Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib. Edited by Aḥmad al-Maḥmūdī. Tehran: Muʾassasat al-Thaqāfah
al-Islāmiyyah li-Kūshānbūr, 1415/1994. al-Ṭabarī, Muḥammad ibn Abī
al-Qāsim ʿImād al-Dīn (d. 525/1131). Bishārat al-Muṣṭafā li-shīʿat
al-Murtaḍā. Edited by Jawād al-Qayyūmī al-Iṣfahānī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-
Nashr al-Islāmī, 1420/2000. al-Ṭabarī, Muḥammad ibn Jarīr ibn Yazīd
(d. 310/923) (comm.). Jāmiʿ al-bayān fī taʾwīl al-Qurʾān. Edited by
Aḥmad Muḥammad Shākir. 24 vols. Cairo: Muʾassasat al-Ri- sālah,
1420/2000.
al-Ṭabarī,MuḥammadibnJarīribnYazīd(d.310/923).Tārīkhal-rusulwa-l-mulūk.Edited
by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd Ibrāhīm. 10 vols. Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif,
1960--1969. Translated by Franz Rosenthal et al. as The History of
al-Tabari. Edited by Ehsan Yar- shater. 39 vols. + index. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1989--2007. al-Ṭabrisī, ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥasan
(fl. late 6th/12th c.). Mishkāt al-anwār fī ghurar al-akhbār. Edited by
Mahdī Hūshmand. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1418/1998. al-Ṭabrisī, al-Faḍl ibn
al-Ḥasan (d. 548/1153) (comm.). Majmaʿ al-bayān fī tafsīr al- Qurʾān.
Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī li-l-Maṭbūʿāt, 1415/1995. al-Ṭabrisī,
al-Faḍl ibn al-Ḥasan (d. 548/1153) (comp.). Nathr al-laʾālī. Edited and
trans- lated into Latin by Jacob Golius as Proverbia quaedam Alis,
imperatoris Muslim- ici, et Carmen Tograi, nec non Dissertatio quædam
Aben Sinæ. Leiden: Ex Officina Bonaventura et Abr. Elzevir, 1629.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 933
al-Ṭabrisī, al-Faḍl ibn al-Ḥasan (d. 548/1153) or Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī
al-Ṭabrisī (d. 588/1192). Al-Iḥtijāj. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir
al-Khurāsānī. Najaf: Dār al-Nuʿmān, 1386/1966. al-Ṭabrisī, al-Ḥasan ibn
al-Faḍl (fl. mid- 6th/12th c.). Makārim al-akhlāq. Edited by Muḥammad
Ḥusayn Sulaymān. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1972. al-Tanūkhī
(d. 384/994). Al-Faraj baʿd al-shiddah. Edited by ʿAbbūd al-Shāljī. 5
vols. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1398/1978.
al-Ṭarṭūshī(d.520/1126).Sirājal-mulūk.Cairo:al-Maktabahal-Azhariyyahal-Miṣriyyah,
1289/1872. Taşköprüzāde, Ahmad Efendi (d. 968/1561) (comm.).
Şerhu'l-Ahlaki'l-Adudiyye Ahlak-ı Adudiyye Şerhi. Edited by Mustakim
Arıcı and Elzem İçöz. Translated into Turkish by Mustakim Arıcı.
Istanbul: Türkiye Yazma Eserler, 2014. al-Tawḥīdī, Abū Ḥayyān
(d. 414/1023). Al-Baṣāʾir wa-l-dhakhāʾir. Edited by Wadād al- Qāḍī. 10
vols. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1408/1988. al-Tawḥīdī, Abū Ḥayyān
(d. 414/1023). Al-Imtāʿ wa-l-muʾānasah. Beirut: al-Maktabah al-
ʿUnṣuriyyah, 1424/2004. al-Thaʿālibī(d.429/1038).
Al-Iʿjāzwa-l-ījāz.EditedbyMuḥammadIbrāhīmSalīm. Cairo: Maktabat
al-Qurʾān, n.d. al-Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1038) (comm.). Al-Jawāhir al-ḥisān
fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān, or Tafsīr al- Thaʿālibī. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAlī
Muʿawwaḍand ʿĀdil Aḥmad ʿAbd al-Mawjūd. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth
al-ʿArabī, 1998. al-Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1038). Laṭāʾif al-maʿārif. Beirut:
Dār al-Manāhil, 1992. al-Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1038). Al-Shakwā wa-l-ʿitāb.
Edited by Ilhām ʿAbd al-Wahhāb al- Muftī. Kuwait: Al-Majlis al-Waṭanī
li-l-Thaqāfah wa-l-Funūn wa-l-Ādāb, 1421/ 2000. al-Thaʿālibī
(d. 429/1038). Al-Tamthīl wa-l-muḥāḍarah. Edited by ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ
Muḥammad al-Ḥulw. Cairo: Al-Dār al-ʿArabiyyah li-l-Kitāb, 1401/1981.
al-Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1038). Thimār al-qulūb fī l-muḍāf wa-l-mansūb.
Edited by Muḥam- mad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. Sidon and Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-ʿAṣriyyah, 2003. al-Thaʿālibī (d. 429/1038). Yatīmat al-dahr fī
maḥāsin ahl al-ʿaṣr. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1403/1983.
Thaʿlab (d. 291/904). Majālis Thaʿlab. Edited by ʿAbd al-Salām Muḥammad
Hārūn. Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, 1950. al-Thaʿlabī (d. 427/1035) (comm.).
Al-Kashf wa-l-bayān ʿan tafsīr al-Qurʾān or Tafsīr al- Thaʿlabī. Edited
by Abū Muḥammad ibn ʿĀshūr. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī,
1422/2002. al-Thaqafī, Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad (d. 283/896). Al-Ghārāt.
Edited by Jalāl al-Dīn Ḥusaynī Muḥaddith. Tehran: Anjuman-i Āthār-i
Millī, 1976. al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892) (comp.). Sunan al-Tirmidhī. Edited
by Aḥmad Shākir et al. Cairo: Maktabat Muṣṭafā al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī,
1395/1975. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 934 bibliography
al-Ṭūfī, Najm al-Dīn Sulaymān ibn ʿAbd al-Qawī (d. 716/1316). Mawāʾid
al-ḥays fī fawāʾid Imriʾ al-Qays. Edited by Muṣṭafā ʿAliyyān. Kuwait:
Wizārat al-Awqāf wa-l-Shuʾūn al- Islāmiyyah Qiṭāʿ al-Shuʾūn
al-Thaqāfiyyah, 1435/2014, 168--173. al-Tushtarī (d. after 533/1139).
Maʿrifat-i Khudāy taʿālā. Edited and translated by Shafique N. Virani as
"Early Nizari Ismailism. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of
Khwajah Qasim Tushtari's Recognizing God." Iran: Journal of the British
Institute of Persian Studies 57/2 (2019), 245--266.
al-Ṭūsī,Shaykhal-Ṭāʾifah(d.460/1067).
Al-Amālī.Qum:Muʾassasatal-Biʿthah,1414/1994. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah
(d. 460/1067). Al-Fihrist. Edited by Muḥammad Ṣādiq Baḥr al- ʿUlūm.
Najaf: al-Maktabah al-Murtaḍawiyyah, 1937. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah
(d. 460/1067). Al-Istibṣār fīmā ʾkhtalafa min al-akhbār. Edited by Ḥasan
al-Mūsawī al-Kharsān. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1363/1943.
al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah (d. 460/1067). Al-Mabsūṭfī fiqh al-Imāmiyyah.
Edited by Muḥammad Taqī al-Kashfī. Tehran: Al-Maktabah al-Murtaḍawiyyah,
1387/1967. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah (d. 460/1067). Miṣbāḥal-mujtahid.
Beirut: Muʾassasat Fiqh al- Shīʿah, 1991. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah
(d. 460/1067). Tahdhīb al-aḥkām. Edited by Ḥasan al-Mūsawī al-Kharsān.
Tehran: Dār al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah, 1365/1945. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh
al-Ṭāʾifah (d. 460/1067). Tafsīr al-tibyān al-jāmiʿ li-ʿulūm al-Qurʾān.
Edited by Aḥmad Ḥabīb Quṣayr al-ʿĀmilī. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth
al-ʿArabī, 1409/ 1989. al-Ṭūsī, Shaykh al-Ṭāʾifah (d. 460/1067) (comm.).
Talkhīṣal-Shāfī li-l-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā. Edited Ḥusayn Baḥr al-ʿUlūm. 3
parts in 4 vols. Najaf: Maktabat al-ʿAlamayn al-Ṭūsī wa-Baḥr al-ʿUlūm,
1963. Warrām al-Ḥillī, Ibn Abī Fāris (d. 605/1208). Majmūʿat Warrām:
Tanbīh al-khawāṭir wa- nuzhat al-nawāẓir. 3 vols. Edited by Bāsim
Muḥammad Mālallāh al-Asadī. Karbala: Al-ʿAtabah al-Ḥusayniyyah
al-Muqaddasah, 1434/2013.
al-Waṭwāṭ,MuḥammadibnIbrāhīm(d.718/1318).Ghuraral-khaṣāʾiṣal-wāḍiḥah.Edited
by Ibrāhīm Shams al-Dīn. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1429/2008.
al-Waṭwāṭ, al-Rashīd (d. 578/1182) (comm.). Maṭlūb kull ṭālib min kalām
ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib:SharḥMiʾatkalimahli-l-Jāḥiẓ.(Persian).EditedbyJalālal-DīnḤusaynīArmawī
Muḥaddith. Tehran: Kitābkhānah-yi Markazī Dānishgāh-i Tihrān, 1382/1962.
al-Yaʿqūbī, IbnWāḍiḥ(d. 284/897).Tārīkh al-Yaʿqūbī. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār
Ṣādir, 1379/1960. Yāqūt al-Ḥamawī (d. 626/1229). Muʿjam al-Buldān. 8
parts in 4 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1997. al-Zajjājī
(d. ca. 337/948). Amālī al-Zajjājī. Edited by ʿAbd al-Salām Hārūn.
Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1407/1987. al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144). Al-Fāʾiq fī
gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by ʿAlī Muḥammad al-Bajāwī and Muḥammad Abū
al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, n.d. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 935
al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144) (comm.). Al-Kashshāf ʿan ḥaqāʾiq
ghawāmiḍal-tanzīl, or Tafsīr al-Zamakhsharī. Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb
al-ʿArabī, 1407/1987. al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144). Rabīʿ al-abrār.
Edited by ʿAbd al-Amīr ʿAlī Muhannā. 5 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat
al-Aʿlamī, 1412/1991. al-Zarandī al-Ḥanafī, Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf
(d. 750/1349). Naẓm Durar al-simṭayn fī faḍāʾil al-Muṣṭafā wa-l-Murtaḍā
wa-l-Batūl wa-l-Sibṭayn. Najaf: Maṭbaʿat al-Qaḍāʾ, 1958. Secondary
Sources Abbas, Hassan. The Prophet's Heir: The Life of ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2021. ʿAbbās, Iḥsān.
Al-Sharīf al-Raḍī. Beirut: Dār Bayrūt, 1959. ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib, Rifʿat
Fawzī (comp.). Ṣaḥīfat ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib ʿan Rasūl Allāh sa: Dirāsah
tawthīqiyyah fiqhiyyah. Cairo: Dār al-Salām, 1986. ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ,
al-Sayyid al-Ḥusaynī al-Khaṭīb. Maṣādir Nahj al-balāghah wa-asānī- duhu.
4 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1975. ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ, al-Sayyid
al-Ḥusaynī al-Khaṭīb. Miʾat shāhid wa-shāhid min maʿānī kalām al-Imām
ʿAlī ʿalayhi l-salām fī shiʿr Abī al-Ṭayyib al-Mutanabbī. Beirut: Dār
al- Aḍwāʾ, 1985. ʿAbduh, Muḥammad (comm.). Nahj al-balāghah: Wa-huwa
majmūʿ mā ʾkhtārahu al-Sharīf al-Raḍī min kalām sayyidinā Amīr
al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib ʿalayhi al- salām. Beirut: al-Maṭbaʿah
al-Adabiyyah, 1885. Expanded commentary by Muḥam- mad Muḥyī al-Dīn ʿAbd
al-Ḥamīd as Nahj al-balāghah. Cairo: Al-Maktabah al-Tijāriyyah al-Kubrā,
1965. Afsaruddin, Asma. "Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī."ei3. Ali, Aun Hasan. "The
Canonization of Nahj al-Balāgha between Najaf and Ḥilla: Sistani and the
Iconic Authority of the Marājiʿ." Journal of the Contemporary Study of
Islam 2:1 (2021), 2--23. al-ʿĀmilī, Ḥusayn Jumʿah. ShurūḥNahj
al-balāghah. Beirut: Maṭbaʿat wa-Zinkūghrāf al- Fikr, 1983. Amīn, Aḥmad.
Fajr al-Islām:Yabḥathu ʿan al-ḥayāh al-ʿaqliyyah fī ṣadr al-Islām ilā
ākhir al-dawlah al-Umawiyyah. Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1929.
al-Amīnī, ʿAbd al-Ḥusayn (comp.). Al-Ghadīr fī l-kitāb wa-l-sunnah
wa-l-adab. 11 vols. Qum: Al-Ghadir Centre for Islamic Studies, 1995.
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali. Ali, le secret bien gardé: Figures du premier
Maître en spiritualité shiʿite. Paris: cnrs Éditions, 2020. Translated
into English by Fransisco José Luis and Anthony Gledhill as Ali, the
Well-Guarded Secret: Figures of the First Master in Shiʿi Spirituality.
Leiden: Brill, 2023. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 936 bibliography
Anṣārī, Ḥasan (= Hassan Ansari). "Riwāyat wa-nuskhah-ī jadīd az
ʿahdnāmah-yi Mālik-i Ashtar." Online:
https://ansari.kateban.com/post/3149. Accessed February 10, 2022.
Anṣārī, Ḥasan (= Hassan Ansari). "Majmūʿah-yi dīgar az nuskhah-hā-yi
khaṭṭī Ambro- siana." Online: https://ansari.kateban.com/post/3494.
Accessed February 13, 2022. Anṣārī, Ḥasan (= Hassan Ansari).
"Tāzah-hā-yi darbārah-yi riwāyat Nahj al-balāghah." Online:
https://ansari.kateban.com/post/1617. Accessed February 10, 2022.
Ansari, Hassan, and Sabine Schmidtke. "The Literary-Religious Tradition
among Seventh/Thirteenth-Century Yemeni Zaydīs (ii), The Case of ʿAbd
Allāh b. Zayd al- ʿAnsī. (Appendix ii)." In Studies in Medieval Islamic
Intellectual Traditions, edited by Sabine Schmidtke and Hassan Ansari.
Atlanta, Georgia: Lockwood Press, Resources in Arabic and Islamic
Studies series, 2017, 193--230. ʿArshī, Imtiyāz ʿAlī Khān. Istinād Nahj
al-balāghah (Urdu). Lucknow: Aḥbāb Publish- ers, 1972. Translated into
Arabic by ʿAzīzallah ʿUṭāridī as Istinād Nahj al-balāghah. Tehran:
Maṭbaʿat al-Ḥaydarī, 1979. Translated into Persian by Murtaḍā Āyatallāh-
zādah Shīrāzī as Istinād-i Nahj al-balāghah. Tehran: Amīr Kabīr, 1984.
Asad, Muhammad (trans. and comm.). The Message of the Qurʾān. Gibraltar:
Dar al- Andalus, 1980. Asatryan, Mushegh. Controversies in Formative
Shīʿī Islam: The Ghulāt Muslims and Their Beliefs. London: I.B. Tauris,
2017. Bayḍūn, LabībWajīh.Taṣnīf Nahj al-balāghah: Min Kalām Amīr
al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. Damascus and Beirut: Dār al-Qalam, 1978.
Bernheimer, Teresa. "Rulers as Authors: ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and the Other
Twelver Imams." In Rulers as Authors in the Islamic World: Knowledge,
Authority and Legitimacy. Edited by Maribel Fierro, Sonja Brentjes, and
Tilman Seidensticker. Leiden: Brill, 2024, 9--29. Biran, Michal.
"Chinggis Khān."ei3. Dashtī, Muḥammad. Ravish-i taḥqīq dar asnād va
madārik-i Nahj al-balāghah. Qum: Nashr-i Imām ʿAlī ʿalayhi al-salām,
1409/1989. Djebli, Moktar. Encore à propos de l'authenticité du Nahj
al-Balagha. Paris: Maison- neuve-Larose, 1992. Djebli, Moktar. "Nahd̲j̲
al-Balag̲h̲a."ei2. EIr = Encyclopedia Iranica. Edited by Ehsan Yarshater
et al. London and Boston: Rout- ledge and Kegan Paul, 1982--. Online:
http://www.iranicaonline.org/. Accessed Feb- ruary 19, 2022. ei2 =
Encyclopaedia of Islam. 2nd ed. Edited by P.J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis,
C.E. Bos- worth, E. van Donzel, and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill: Leiden,
1960--2011, online 2012. Accessed February 19, 2022. ei3 = Encyclopaedia
of Islam, three. Edited by K. Fleet, G. Krämer, D. Matringe, J. Na- was,
E. Rowson, and D. Stewart. Brill: Leiden, print and online, 2007--.
Accessed February 19, 2022. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 937
Esḥāqī, Peymān (= Peyman Eshaghi). "Manbaʿ-shināsī-yi tarjamah-hā-yi
Nahj al- balāghah be-barkhī zabān-hā-i ghayr-i ʿArabī."Falsafah wa-kalām
4 (2011), 337--360. Online:
https://www.noormags.ir/view/fa/articlepage/837967/منبع-شناسی-ترجمه-های-
نهج-البلاغه-به-برخی-زبان-های-غیر-عربی .Accessed February 10, 2022.
Fierro, Maribel. Historia de los Autores y Transmisores Andalusíes
(hata). Online data- base: https://www.eea.csic.es/red/hata/index.html.
Accessed February 10, 2022. Gleave, Robert M. "ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib."ei3.
Halm, Heinz. Die islamische Gnosis: Die extreme Schia und die ʿAlawiten.
Munich: Artemis Verlag, 1982. Halm, Heinz. "Ğolāt."EIr. al-Hansawī,
Sibṭal-Ḥasan. Minhāj Nahj al-balāghah. Lucknow: Dār al-Nashr
li-l-Maʿārif al-Islāmiyyah, 1951. Hassan, Syed Mohammad Waris. A
Critical Study of Nahj al-balāgha. Ph.D. diss., Uni- versity of
Edinburgh, 1979. Hawting, G.R. "Muḥammad b. Abī Bakr."ei2. Ḥaydar, Kāmil
(comp.). Rasāʾil al-Imām ʿAlī. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr al-Lubnānī, 1995.
Husayn, Nebil. Opposing the Imām: The Legacy of the Nawāṣib in Islamic
Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021. al-Ḥusaynī,
Ibrāhīm Khalīl Dhahab Maḥmūd. Al-Imām ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib fī kutub al-
Qāḍī al-Nuʿmān al-Maghribī (d. 363 ah/974 ad). PhD diss., University of
Karbala, 2019. Inloes, Amina. "Was Imam ʿAli a Misogynist? The Portrayal
of Women in Nahj al- Balaghah and Kitab Sulaym ibn Qays." Journal of
Shīʿa Islamic Studies 8/3 (2015), 325--365. Jackson, Peter. "Hülegü b.
Toluy b. Chinggis Khān."ei3. al-Jalālī, Muḥammad Ḥusayn. Dirāsah ḥawl
Nahj al-balāghah. Beirut: Muʾassasat al- Aʿlamī li-l-Maṭbūʿāt,
1421/2001. al-Jalālī, Muḥammad Ḥusayn. SharḥNahj al-balāghah li-l-Imām
ʿAlī ibn AbīṬālib. 5 vols. Qum: n.p., 1422/2002.
al-Jindī,ʿAlī,MuḥammadAbūal-FaḍlIbrāhīm,andMuḥammadYūsuf Maḥjūb(comp.).
Sajʿ al-ḥamām: Fī Ḥikam al-Imām Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib.
Cairo: Makta- bat al-Anjlū-Miṣriyyah, 1967. Jiwa, Shainool. "The Baghdad
Manifesto (402/1011). A Re-Examination of Fatimid- Abbasid Rivalry." In
The Fatimid Caliphate: Diversity of Traditions, edited by Farhad Daftary
and Shainool Jiwa. London: I.B. Tauris, 2018, 22--79. Jurdāq, Jurj.
Rawāʾiʿ Nahj al-balāghah. Beirut: al-Sharikah al-Sharqiyyah, 1973. Kara,
Seyfeddin. In Search of Ali Ibn Abi Talib's Codex: History and
Traditions of the Ear- liest Copy of the Qurʾan. Berlin: Gerlach Press,
2018. Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ,al-Hādī(comp.).
MustadrakNahjal-balāghah.Beirut:ManshūrātMak- tabat al-Andalus, 1970.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 938 bibliography Kaur,
Kuldip. Madrasa Education in India: A Study of its Past and Present.
Chandigarh, India: Centre for Research in Rural & Industrial
Development, 1990. Kawar, Irfan. "D ̲ j̲ad̲h̲īma al-Abras̲h̲ or
al-Waḍḍāḥ."ei2. Kazmi, Latif Hussain. "An Essay on the Place of
Tolerance in Islam." Journal of Shīʿa Islamic Studies 2/1 (2009),
27--51. Keizoghani, S.M., and A. Moulavi Nafchi. "The Greatness of Nahj
Al-Balagha and the Words of Imam Ali from the Perspective of Modern
Christian Figures."International Letters of Social and Humanistic
Sciences 69 (2016), 5--14. Khulūṣī, Ṣafāʾ. "The Authenticity of Nahj
al-Balagha."Islamic Review 38 (1950), 31--350. Kohlberg, Etan. "ʿAlī b.
Abī Ṭāleb."EIr. Lāhījānī (or: al-Lāhījī), Mīrzā Muḥammad-Bāqir Nawwāb
(d. ca. 1824) (comm.). Sharḥ Nahj al-balāghah (Persian). 2 vols. Edited
by Muḥammad Mahdī Jaʿfarī and Muḥam- mad Yūsuf Nayyirī. Tehran: Mīrāth-i
Maktūb 2000. Lane, Edward William. An Arabic-English Lexicon: Derived
from the Best and the Most Copious Eastern Sources. London and
Edinburgh: Williams and Norgate, 1863--1893. Lanham, Richard. Analyzing
Prose. New York: Charles Scribner, 1983. Lecomte, G. "Al-Saḳīfa."ei2.
Madelung, Wilferd. "S̲h̲īʿa."ei2. Madelung, Wilferd. The Succession to
Muhammad: A Study of the Early Caliphate. Cam- bridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1997. al-Maḥmūdī, Muḥammad Bāqir (comp.). Nahj
al-saʿādah fī mustadrak Nahj al-balā- ghah. 13 vols. Tehran: Muʾassasat
al-Ṭibāʿah wa-l-Nashr Wizārat al-Thaqāfah wa-l- Irshād al-Islāmī, 2002.
Manouchehri, Faramarz, Reza Shah-Kazemi, Ali Bahramian, Ahmad Pakatchi,
Dary- oush Poor, Masoud Tareh, Mohammad Jozi, Sadeq Sajjadi, Ali
Bulookbashi, Mah- banoo Alizadeh, and Yadollah Gholami. "ʿAlī b. Abī
Ṭālib." In Encyclopaedia Islam- ica, edited by Wilferd Madelung and
Farhad Daftary. First published online: 2015. Online:
http://dx.doi.org.proxy.uchicago.edu/10.1163/1875‑9831_isla_COM_0252.
Ac- cessed February 22, 2022. al-Marṣafī,MuḥammadḤasanNāʾil(comm.).
KitābNahjal-balāghah: Al-Jāmiʿli-khuṭab wa-rasāʾil mawlānā Amīr
al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib ṣalawāt Allāh ʿalayhi. 2 vols. Cairo: Dār
al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyyah al-Kubrā, 1910. Matthiesen, Toby. "Sectarian
Orientalism: How Orientalists (mostly) adopted the Sunni Narrative of
Islamic History, and then helped institutionalise sectarian dif-
ference." In The I.B. Tauris Handbook to Rethinking Islamic Studies:
Explorations in Interactions, Ambiguities and Peripheries. Edited by
Seyfeddin Kara and Suleyman Dost. Bloomsbury/I.B. Tauris forthcoming
2024. Mīr-Jahānī, Ḥasan (comp.). Miṣbāḥal-balāghah, or Mustadrakāt Nahj
al-balāghah. 3 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī̄, 2008.
Morgan, David. "Mongols."ei2. Morony, M. "Al-Nahrawān."ei2. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 939
Morrow, John Andrew. Shiʿism in the Maghrib and Al-Andalus. Vol. 2:
Traditions. New- castle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2020.
Mourad, Suleiman. Early Islam between Myth and History: Al-Ḥasan
al-Baṣrī (d. 110h/ 728ce) and the Formation of his Legacy in Classical
Islamic Scholarship. Leiden: Brill, 2006. Mughniyyah, Muḥammad Jawād
(comm.). Fī Ẓilāl Nahj al-balāghah: Muḥāwalah li- fahm jadīd. 4 vols.
Beirut: Dār al-ʿIlm li-l-Malāyīn, 1972--1973. Muḥammad, Uways Karīm.
Al-Muʿjam al-mawḍūʿī li-Nahj al-balāghah. Mashhad: Muʾassasat al-Ṭabʿ
wa-l-Nashr fī l-Āsitānah al-Raḍawiyyah al-Muqaddasah, 1988. Muḥammadī,
Kāẓim and Muḥammad Dashtī. Al-Muʿjam al-mufahras li-alfāẓNahj al-
balāghah. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1986. Muntaẓirī, Ḥusayn ʿAlī. Dars-hā-yi
az Nahj al-balāghah. 11 vols. Qum: Daftar-e Ente- sharat-e Eslami, 1983.
Musil,Alois.TheMiddleEuphrates:ATopographicalItinerary.NewYork:AmericanGeo-
graphical Society, 1927. Muṭahharī, Murtaḍā. Sayr-ī dar Nahj
al-balāghah, Qum 1975. Translated into English by Ali Quli Qaraʾi as
Glimpses of Nahjul-Balagha. Online: https://www.al‑islam.org/​
glimpses‑nahjul‑balagha‑murtadha‑mutahhari. Accessed February 10, 2022.
Muttaqī, Ḥusayn. "Iṭlālah ʿalā makhṭūṭāt Nahj al-balāghah fī l-maktabāt
al-ʿālamiy- yah \[Overview of Nahj al-balāghah manuscripts in libraries
across the world\]."
Paygāh-iKhabarī-yiNusakh-iKhaṭṭī.LastmodifiedTīr5,1395\[June25,2016\].Online:
http://manuscripts.ir/fa/90/بانک-اطلاعات-news/إطلالة-على-مخطوطات-نهج-البلاغة-في-
المكتبات-العالمية-3835/مقالات .Accessed May 17, 2023. Muttaqī, Ḥusayn.
Muʿjam al-āthār al-makhṭūṭah fī al-Imām ʿAlī ʿalayhi al-salām (Lexi- con
of Ancient Manuscripts on Imam Ali, pbuh). Karbala: Maktabat wa-Dār
Makhṭū- ṭāt al-ʿAtabah al-ʿAbbāsiyyah al-Muqaddasah, 2019. al-Najaf
Abādī, al-Durrī. "La conception du gouvernement islamique dans Nahj al
bal- āghah." Aux Sources de la Sagesse 1/2 (1994), 95--114. Naqavī,
Muḥammad Taqī (comm.). Miftāḥal-saʿādah: Fī SharḥNahj al-balāghah. 18
vols. Tehran: Qāʾin, 2005--2007. Ong, Walter J. Orality and Literacy:
The Technologizing of the Word. London: Methuen, 1982. Osborne, Hannah.
"Hyena Burger? SaudiTaste forWild MeatThreatens Species Extinc- tion,"
International Business Times, June 21, 2013. Online at
https://www.ibtimes.co​
.uk/hyena‑meat‑extinction‑saudi‑arabia‑consumption‑halal‑481755. Paul,
Jürgen. "Dihqān."ei3. Pellat, Charles. "Al-K̲h̲irrīt,"ei2. Popovic,
Alexandre. "Al-Zand̲j̲, 2. The Zand̲j̲ revolts in ʿIrāḳ."ei2.
al-Qāḍī,Wadād(=WadadKadi)."AnEarlyFāṭimidPoliticalDocument."StudiaIslamica
48 (1978), 71--108. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 940 bibliography
Qubānchī, Ḥasan, with Ṭāhir Sallāmī (comp.). Musnad al-Imām ʿAlī ʿalayhi
al-salām. 10 vols, Tehran: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī̄, 1999. Qutbuddin,Tahera.
"ʿAli ibn AbiTalib." In Dictionary of Literary Biography.Vol. 311: Ara-
bic Literary Culture, 500--925. Edited by Michael Cooperson and Shawkat
Toorawa. Farmington Hills, Michigan: Thomson Gale, 2005, 68--76.
Qutbuddin,Tahera. "Khuṭba:The Evolution of Early Arabic Oration." In
Classical Arabic Humanities in their Own Terms: Festschrift for Wolfhart
Heinrichs on His 65th Birth- day Presented by His Students and
Colleagues. Edited by Beatrice Gruendler with Michael Cooperson. Leiden:
Brill, 2008, 176--273. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "The Sermons of ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib: At the Confluence of the Core Islamic Teachings of the Qurʾan and
the Oral, Nature-Based Cultural Ethos of Sev- enth Century Arabia."
Anuario de Estudios Medievales 42:1 (2012), 201--228. Qutbuddin, Tahera.
"Khoṭba." In Encyclopaedia Iranica. Edited by Ehsan Yarshater. Online
edition, 2013. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "ʿAlī's Contemplations on this World
and the Hereafter in the Con- text of His Life and Times." In Essays in
Islamic Philology, History, and Philosophy, edited by A. Korangy, W.
Thackston, R. Mottahedeh, and W. Granara. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter,
2016, 333--353. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Qurʾan Citation in Early Arabic
Oration (khuṭba): Mnemonic, Liturgical andTestimonial Functions." InThe
Qurʾan and Adab:The Shaping of Liter- ary Traditions in Classical Islam.
Edited by Nuha Alshaar. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017, 315--340.
Qutbuddin, Tahera. "A Sermon on Piety by Imam ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib: How
the Rhythm of theClassicalArabicOrationTacitlyPersuaded."In
ReligionandAestheticExperience: Drama---Sermons---Literature. Edited by
Jan Scholz, Max Stille, Sabine Dorpmüller, and Ines Weinrich.
Heidelberg: Heidelberg University Press, Heidelberg Studies on
Transculturality series, 2018, 109--124. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Piety and
Virtue in Early Islam: Two Sermons by Imam Ali." In Self-Transcendence
and Virtue: Perspectives from Philosophy, Psychology, and Theol- ogy.
Edited by Jennifer Frey and Candace Vogler. London and New York:
Routledge, Studies in Ethics and Moral Theory series, 2018, 125--153.
Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd."ei3. 2018-2, 78--81. Qutbuddin,
Tahera. "Orations of Zaynab and Umm Kulthūm in the Aftermath of Ḥusayn's
Martyrdom at Karbala: Speaking Truth to Power." In The Other Martyrs:
Women and the Poetics of Sexuality, Sacrifice, and Death in World
Literatures. Edited by Alireza Korangy and Leila Rouhi. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz Verlag, 2019, 103--132. Qutbuddin, Tahera. Arabic Oration:
Art and Function. Leiden: Brill, 2019. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Books on
Arabic Philology and Literature: A Teaching Collection Focused on
Religious Learning and the State Chancery." In Treasures of Knowledge:
An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library (1502/3--1503/4), 2 vols.
Edited by G. Neci- poglu, C. Kefadar, and C. Fleischer. Muqarnas
Supplements 14 (2019), 1:607--634. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 bibliography 941
Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Nahj al-balāgha,"ei3, 2023-1, 99--107. Qutbuddin,
Tahera. "Al-Sharīf al-Raḍī."ei3, 2023-1, 147--151. Qutbuddin, Tahera.
"Classical Islamic Oration's Art, Function, and Life-Altering Power of
Persuasion: The Ultimate Response by Hammam to Ali's Sermon on Piety,
and by Hurr to Husayn's Battle Oration in Karbala."Medieval Sermon
Studies 67:1 (2023), 74--87. Special volume edited by Linda G. Jones and
Jussi Hanska. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Arabic Oration in Early Islam:
Religion, Ritual, and Rhetoric." In Speaking to God and the World:
Ritual and Social Dynamics of Religious Speech. Edited by Ruth Conrad
and Matthias Mader, London: Bloomsbury, 2024, 156--172. Qutbuddin,
Tahera. "Just Leadership in Early Islam: The Teachings and Practice of
Imam Ali." In The Arts of Leading: Perspectives from the Humanities and
the Liberal Arts. Edited by Edward Brooks and Michael Lamb. Georgetown
University Press, forthcoming 2024, ch 5. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Oration as
Literature: Oral Aesthetics and Interdisciplinary Func- tions in the
Sermons and Speeches of the 7th- and 8th-century Islamic World," Jour-
nal of Arabic Literature, forthcoming 2024. Qutbuddin, Tahera. "Orality
as Driver of Qurʾanic Aesthetics: Mnemonic and Metony- mic Techniques of
Pulsating Rhythm, Vivid Imagery, Agonistic Engagement, and
ContextEvocation."InTheEdinburghCompaniontoQurʾanicLiteraryStudies.Edited
by Shawkat Toorawa. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, forthcoming
2024. Qutbuddin,Tahera. "Is Nahj al-balāghah a Shiʿi Book? Insidious
Labels and Academia's Mythof
Objectivity."InTheI.B.TaurisHandbooktoRethinkingIslamicStudies:Explo-
rations in Interactions, Ambiguities and Peripheries. Edited by
Seyfeddin Kara and Suleyman Dost. Bloomsbury/I.B. Tauris, forthcoming
2024. Rahim, Habibeh. "ʿAli ibn Abi Talib." In The Encyclopedia of
Religion. Edited by Mircea Eliade et al. New York: Macmillan, 1987,
1:204--210. al-Rayshahri, Muḥammad. Mawsūʿat al-Imam ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib
fī l-kitāb wa-l-sunnah wa-l-tārīkh. 12 volumes. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ
al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 2000. Sayf al-Dīn, Ṭāhir. Al-Risālah
al-Ramaḍāniyyah: Ḍāwʾ nūr al-ḥaqq al-mubīn. Mumbai: Ṭayyibī Daʿwa
Publications, 1335/1917. Sayf al-Dīn, Ṭāhir. Al-Risālah al-Ramaḍāniyyah:
Zubdat al-burhān al-ṣidq al-wāḍih. Mumbai: Ṭayyibī Daʿwa Publications,
1347/1929. Sayf al-Dīn, Ṭāhir. Al-Risālah al-Ramaḍāniyyah: Masarrāt
al-fatḥal-mubīn, Mumbai: Ṭayyibī Daʿwa Publications, 1353/1934. Sayf
al-Dīn, Ṭāhir. Al-Risālah al-Ramaḍāniyyah: Dalw ghadīr ḥaqq. Mumbai:
Ṭayyibī Daʿwa Publications, 1362/1943. Schoeler, Gregor. The Genesis of
Literature in Islam: From the Aural to the Read. Trans- lated by Shawkat
M. Toorawa. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2009. Shahīd, Irfan.
"Al-Zabbāʾ."ei2. Shah-Kazemi, Reza. Justice and Remembrance. Introducing
the Spirituality of Imam Ali. London: I.B. Tauris, 2006. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 942 bibliography Shams
al-Dīn, Ibrāhīm (comp.). Khuṭab Amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī ibn
AbīṬālib:Yaḥtawī ʿalā 230 khuṭbah fī l-dīn wa-l-siyāsah wa-l-targhīb
wa-l-tarhīb wa-l-waʿẓwa-l-tadhkīr wa- l-zuhd wa-ghayr dhālik. Beirut:
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 2007. Silsilah fī riḥāb Nahj al-balāghah.
Series published by Imam Ali Shrine, Najaf 2018. Online:
https://www.haydarya.com/?id=132. Accessed February 10, 2022.
Stetkevych, Suzanne. "Al-Sharīf al-Raḍī and Nahj al-balāghah. Rhetoric,
Dispossession, and the Lyric." Journal of Arabic Literature 50 (2019),
211--250. Stillman, N.A. "Yahūd."ei2. Sultan, Jamil. Étude sur Nahj
al-Balâgha. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1940. al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAbd
al-ʿAzīz. "Al-Mutabaqqī min makhṭūṭāt Nahj al-balāghah ḥattā l- qarn
al-thāmin al-hijrī," Turāthunā 5 (1406/1986), pp. 25--102. Online:
https://books​ .rafed.net/view.php?type=c_fbook&b_id=2621. Accessed
February 10, 2022. al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz. "Ma tabaqqā min
makhṭūṭāt Nahj al-balāghah," Turāthunā 7/8 (1407/1987), pp. 13--36.
Online: https://arabic.balaghah.net/content/%D9%85​
%D8%A7‑%D8%AA%D8%A8%D9%82%D9%89‑%D9%85%D9%86‑%D9%85%
D8%AE%D8%B7%D9%88%D8%B7%D8%A7%D8%AA‑%D9%86%D9%87%D8
%AC‑%%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A8%D9%84%D8%A7%D8%BA%D8%A9. Accessed January 31,
2024. al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz. "Fī Riḥāb Nahj al-Balāghah.
Makhṭūṭātuhu, ṭabʿātuhu, muntakhabātuhu, tarjamātuhu ilā shattā
l-lughāt, shurūḥu, mā qīla fīhi min naẓm wa-nathr," Part 1--3: Turāthunā
29 (1412/1992), pp. 7--89. Online: https://books.rafed​
.net/view.php?type=c_fbook&b_id=2769&page=7. Accessed February 10, 2022.
al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī,MuḥammadḤusayn(comp.),andWilliamChittick,trans.,withintroduc-
tion by Hossein Nasr. A Shiʿite Anthology. Albany, NY: suny, 1981.
Ṭāliqānī, Maḥmūd (trans. and comm.). Tarjumah va sharḥ-i Nahj
al-balāghah. Tehran: Kitābfurūshī-i Bīnish, 1970. Thaver, Tehseen.
Beyond Sectarianism: Ambiguity, Hermeneutics, and the Formations of
Religious Identity in Islam. University of Pennsylvania Press,
forthcoming 2024. al-Tihrānī, Āghā Buzurg. Al-Dharīʿah ilā taṣānīf
al-shīʿah. 25 vols. + 3 index vols. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1983. Tijani,
Smaoui Mohamed. Les méthodes d'analyse et de pensée dans le
Nahj-al-Balagha de l'imam Ali Ibn Abi Taleb. Ph.D. diss., University of
Paris i (Sorbonne), 1984. al-Tustarī, Muḥammad Taqī (comm.). Bahj
al-ṣabāghah: Fī SharḥNahj al-balāghah. 14 vols. Tehran: Dār Amīr Kabīr
li-l-Nashr, 1997. Veccia Vaglieri, L. "ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib."ei2. Veccia
Vaglieri, L. "Observations sur le Nahd̲j̲ al-balāg̲h̲a," in Proceedings. of
the 24th Congress of Orientalists, Munich 1957, 318--319.
VecciaVaglieri, L. "Sul Nahǧ al-balāġa e sul suo compilatore
al-Raḍī."Annali dell'Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli, new
series 8 (1958), 1--46. Viré, F. "Ḍabuʿ."ei2. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
bibliography 943 Waseem, Shah-Mohammad, and S. Ali Mohammad Naqavi,
eds. Nahjul Balagha and Inter-religious Understanding. Delhi:
Renaissance Publishing House, 1997. Zetterstéen, K.V. "al-Nuʿmān ibn
Bashīr."ei2. Online Resources for Nahj al-balāghah All accessed January
1, 2024. Aviny.com (Nahj al-balāghah), website affiliated with the
office of the late Sayyed Morteza Aviny, includes sections on "sources,
contents, commentaries, and miscon- ceptions" regarding Nahj
al-balāghah, in English. Balaghah.net (Fī Riḥāb Nahj al-balāghah),
website supervised by the office of Aya- tollah Sistani, begun 2004,
aims to edit and publish all materials related to Nahj al-balāghah.
Haydarya.com (al-Maktabah al-mukhtaṣṣah bi-l-Imām Amīr al-muʾminīn.
ShurūḥNahj al-balāghah), online access to all Nahj al-balāghah
commentaries and other rele- vant works in Arabic. Hadith.net (Shiʿa
ḤadīthWeb Site), text, translation, sources, Encyclopedia of Imam Ali.
Al‑Islam.org (Nahj al-balāghah), text, translation, sources, studies.
Imamalinet.net (Pāyigāh-i Imām ʿAlī), text, translation, studies.
Nahjalbalaghah.org, text, translation, manuscripts, commentaries,
studies (under con- struction). Shiaonlinelibrary.com (al-Maktabah
al-Shīʿīyyah), text, commentaries, studies. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Index of
Names and Places This Index lists names from the Detailed Contents and
Translation (and from the footnotes in parentheses) Aaron (Ar. Hārūn)
447 al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib 56, 125 al-ʿAbbās ibn Mirdās
al-Sulamī (601n2) Abbasids (99n1, 245n3, 521n5, 717n2, 805n2, 811n4)
ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Marwān (197n4) ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān (197n4, 257n2,
321n4) ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib ibn Hāshim 547, 571, 619 ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn
ʿAttāb ibn Asīd 78, 501 ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf (121n2) ʿAbd al-Raḥmān
ibn Ṣafwān (501n2) ʿAbd Manāf ibn Quṣayy 501, 547 ʿAbd Shams 711
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās 59, 82, 84--85, 88-- 89, 123, 153, 157, 527,
549, 551, 599, 665, 671, 675, 781, 825, (187n3, 605nn1--2, 789n2)
ʿAbdallāh ibn Awfah al-Yashkurī See Ibn al-Kawwāʾ ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-Ḥaḍramī (179n1) ʿAbdallāh ibn Jaʿfar (711n2, 753n3) ʿAbdallāh ibn
Mālik ibn Dajnah 523 ʿAbdallāh ibn Masʿūd (153n3) ʿAbdallāh ibn Qays See
Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī ʿAbdallāh ibn Ṣafwān (501n2) ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar
763, (319n1, 681n3) ʿAbdallāh ibn Zamaʿah 79, 521 ʿAbdallāh ibn
al-Zubayr (127n2) ʿAbduh, Muḥammad (Abbr. "ʿA", passim) Abel (Ar. Hābīl)
See Cain and Abel Abraham (Ar. Ibrāhīm) 567, 703 Abū al-Aʿwar al-Sulamī
(545n1) Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī 413 Abū Bakr 80, 537, (119n1, 125n2, 145n3,
189n2, 191n2, 319n2, 367n1, 371n3, 471n1, 563n4, 569n1, 613n1, 655n3,
683n3, 733n1) Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī 311, (317n2, 487n1, 769n4) Abū
Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī (569n2) Abū Firās Hammām ibn Ghālib See Faraz- daq
Abū Hurayrah al-Dawsī al-Yamānī (649n2) Abū Jahl ʿAmr ibn Hishām (459n3,
567n2) Abū Juḥayfah Wahb ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Suwāʾī 797 Abū Jundub
al-Hudhalī (145n1) Abū Lahab (215n1, 567n5) Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī 88--89,
525, 659, 675, (159n2, 401n3, 483n1, 681n3) Abū Muslim al-Khawlānī
(539n2) Abū Sufyān 56, 125, 369, 547, 605, 611, (215n1, 459n3,
567nn2--3, 603n3, 609n2, 657n1, 659n4, 661n2) Abū Ṭālib 125, 149, 159,
251, 299, 389, 547, 613 Abū Tharwān (653n3) Abū ʿUbayd al-Harawī 755 Abū
Umāmah al-Bāhilī (563n2) Adam (Ar. Ādam) 56, 75, 107, 111, 239, 241,
441, 447, 451 son(s) of 399, 685, 733, 749, 763, 807, 815 ʿAfīf ibn Qays
(201n2) Aḥmad ibn Qutaybah al-Hamdānī 523 al-Aḥnaf ibn Qays 69, 307,
(681n3) Ahwaz 551 ʿĀʾishah bint Abī Bakr 64, 72, 80, 531, (129n4, 139n2,
157n2, 203n1, 335n1, 345n3, 347n5, 353n2, 389n3, 481n3, 535n2, 595n1,
619n3, 661, 707n2, 715n4) ʿAlāʾ ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī 485 ʿAlī ibn Abī
Ṭālib passim ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Sajjād Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn (101n1, 767n2)
ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Zanjī (307n4) Allies (Ar. Anṣār) 189, 531, 569,
819. See also Emigrants and Allies Amalekites (Ar. ʿamālīq) 411 ʿAmmār
ibn Yāsir 413, 803, (265n1, 317n2, 531n1, 651n2) ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Wadd
(179n3, 459n3) ʿAmr ibn Abī Sufyān (661n2) ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ 59, 64, 74,
84, 86, 147, 215, 525, 603, 783, (145n2, 159n2, 165n1, 165n3, 191n1,
401n3, 405n1, 405n4, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of names and
places 945 ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ(cont.) 471n1, 483n1, 499n2, 565n7, 599n1,
621n1, 649n2, 657n1, 675n3) ʿAmr ibn al-Ḥamiq al-Khuzāʿī (483n1) ʿAmr
ibn Salamah al-Hamdānī al-Arḥabī 82, (533n2, 549n3) Anas ibn Mālik 777,
(681n3) Anbar 59, 147, 689, 761 Antichrist. See Dajjāl ʿAqīl ibn Abī
Ṭālib 79, 84, 513, 599 Arabs 59, 66, 125, 145, 157, 261, 267, 291, 301,
323, 331, 341, 385, 457, 467, 531, 547, 615, 655, 755 Ardashīr-khurrah
85, 609, (169n3, 407n1, 605n1) ʿArj 525 Asad 72, 367, (501n2, 567n3)
al-Aṣbagh ibn Nubātah (153n2, 325n1, 715n4) Aʿshā Maymūn 757, (119n2)
al-Ashʿath ibn Qays 58, 79--80, 91, 137, 535, 771, 805, (201n2,
513nn3--4, 699n3, 703n4) Ashtar See Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar ʿĀṣim
ibn Ziyād al-Ḥārithī 77, 487 al-Aswad ibn Quṭbah 87, 653 ʿAyn al-Tamr
60, 63, (165n1, 191n3) Azerbaijan 80, 535 Badr, Battle of Badr 539, 541,
571, (179n2, 459n3, 567n2, 567n4, 661n2, 661n4) Baghdad (309n1, 665n4)
Bahrain 85, 607, (375n1, 485n3, 563n3) Baḥrānī, Maytham (abbr. "B",
passim) Basra 57, 60, 69, 72, 78, 80, 82--83, 85, 87, 89, 129, 157, 195,
259, 307, 319, 335, 353, 385, 389, 485, 501, 521, 531, 533, 549, 551,
571, 611, 651, 675, 777, (127n4, 139n2, 139n4, 153n4, 179n1, 203n1,
253n4, 255n4, 257n3, 261n3, 265n1, 279n1, 293n3, 321n1, 331n3, 345n3,
355n3, 387n1, 393n1, 439n4, 481n1, 487n1, 517n4, 535n2, 599n1, 605n1,
647n2, 661n1, 685n2, 707n2, 715n2, 715n4, 731n2, 753n2, 781n1, 795n4)
Basran 5, 64, 73, 385, (571n6) Baṭḥāʾ See Mecca Bishr ibn Abī Khāzim
al-Asadī (661n3) Bishr ibn Marwān (197n4) (The) Book (Ar. al-Kitāb) 113,
135, 199, 217, 221, 229, 299, 303, 315, 321, 333, 335, 385, 405, 475,
577, 673, 719. See also Qurʾan, Wise Remembrance Boys-of-Hellfire 567
Burak ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Tamīmī (165n3) Burj ibn Musʾhir al-Ṭāʾī 74, 419
Busr ibn Abī Arṭāt 143 Byzantium (Ar. Rūm) 453 Caesar (Ar. Qayṣar) 535
Cain (Ar. Qābīl) and Abel (443n2) Camel (Ar. Jamal), Battle of the Camel
56-- 60, 63--64, 68, 70--73, 78--80, 82, 87--89, 129, 153, 195, 203,
385, 501, 521, 573, 659, 761, (123n2, 125n4, 127nn1--4, 131n1, 139n2,
139n4, 157n2, 167n2, 169n1, 243n3, 253n4, 255n4, 257n3, 265n1, 279n1,
293n3, 299n2, 307n3, 319n3, 321n1, 331n3, 335n1, 335n4, 345n3,
353nn1--2, 355n3, 373n1, 387n1, 389, 391n1, 393n1, 457n1, 457n3, 481n1,
481n3, 485n3, 487n1, 515n2, 517n4, 533nn1--2, 535nn2--3, 537n1, 539n1,
549n1, 595n1, 611n1, 619n3, 647n2, 651n2, 663n1, 669n1, 673n2, 675n1,
681n4, 685n2, 715n2, 715n4, 727n1, 731nn1--2, 753n2, 763n1, 777n1,
795n4) Chiefs-of-the-Youth-of-Paradise 567. See also al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī;
al-Ḥusayn ibn ʾAlī Chosroes (Ar. Kisrā) 535 Confederates (Ar. Aḥzāb),
Battle of the Con- federates 459 al-Ḍaḥḥāk ibn Qays al-Fihrī 59, 84,
599, (151n2) Dajjāl, the Antichrist (257n2) Damascus (169n1, 369n1,
537n1, 537n3, 539n1, 601n3, 603n3, 619n1, 649n1, 659n3, 663n1, 669n1,
671n2, 781n1) Dārī 375, 379 David (Ar. Dāʾūd) 72, 90, 363, 411, 707
Dhakwān (311n2) Dhiʿlib al-Yamānī 74, 403, (431n3, 523n3) Dhū al-Rummah
291 Dhū al-Shahādatayn See Khuzaymah ibn al-Thābit Dhū al-Thudayyah
(457n2, 731n2) al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 946 index of names and
places Dhū Qār 59, 79, 87, 157, 521, (125n4, 127n4, 319n3, 331n3, 387n1,
517n4, 651n2, 659n1) Ḍīrār ibn Ḍamrah al-Ḍibābī 90, 697 Dūmat al-Jandal
(129n2, 675n3) Durayd ibn al-Ṣimmah (161n3) Egypt 62, 83--87, 191, 559,
561, 597, 599, 603, 625, 655, (145n2, 165n1, 169n2, 197n4, 405n1, 499n2,
571n6, 617n1, 651n3, 783n1, 813n5) Emigrants (Ar. Muhājirūn) 531, 547,
549, 565, 569, 649 and Allies 455, 525, 537, 571, 661. See also Allies
Euphrates (Ar. Furāt) 173, 175, 757, (165n1, 655n1) Fadak 85, 613,
(125n2) Family of the Prophet See Muḥammad, Family of Farazdaq 101, 815
Fars 551, 825 (605n1, 609nn1--2, 669n2). See also Persia Fāṭimah
al-Zahrāʾ 76, 479, 555, (125n2, 354n2, 567nn4--5, 613n1, 775n3) Firās
ibn Ghanam 145 Followers-in-Virtue (Ar. al-tābiʿūna bi-iḥsān) 88--89,
113, 247, 411, 571 Freedmen (Ar. ṭulaqāʾ) 547, 563, 565, (311n2, 551n2,
727n1, 805n3) Fusṭāṭ (651n3) Gabriel (Ar. Jibrīl) 409, 455 Ghadīr Khumm
(99n2, 663n3) Ghālib ibn Ṣaʿṣaʿah 815 Ghāmidī See Sufyān ibn ʿAwf
al-Ghāmidī God, Lord passim assigning partners/peers to 82, 219, 285,
315, 337, 347, 401, 553 (no) attributes of 105, 107, 109, 229, 371, 427,
445, 467, 489, 581 blessings of 63, 75, 99, 113, 141, 173, 195, 205,
209, 255, 267, 273, 285, 287, 289, 309, 325, 327, 355, 393, 407, 431,
433, 437, 453, 461, 465, 467, 469, 473, 495, 497, 545, 565, 573, 579,
621, 627, 645, 647, 667, 681, 685, 719, 733, 741, 747, 767, 771, 789,
795, 799, 801, 809 bounty of 75, 185, 187, 205, 227, 267, 279, 291, 355,
403, 407, 417, 421, 423, 431, 453, 469, 495, 561, 563, 621 consciousness
of 54, 62, 75, 79, 83, 86-- 87, 185, 205, 207, 209, 211, 285, 289, 311,
367, 391, 411, 415, 431, 435, 437, 445, 467, 469, 471, 473, 519, 555,
559, 575, 579, 617, 625, 651, 785, 793, 803. See also God, fear of
decree of 109, 113, 163, 187, 273, 409, 445, 495, 517 direction of 105,
185, 217, 231, 333, 395, 469, 579, 739 Emissary of 195, 267, 411 favors
of 56, 66--67, 99, 107, 113, 115, 117, 171, 173, 177, 203, 205, 209,
225, 227, 241, 253, 255, 267, 273, 285, 295, 347, 365, 407, 431, 437,
445, 455, 469, 473, 497, 511, 533, 585, 617, 623, 647, 681, 723, 745
fear of 81, 83, 121, 123, 141, 143, 207, 209, 217, 235, 263, 273, 287,
327, 347, 357, 361, 373, 383, 399, 417, 423, 435, 443, 449, 453, 463,
489, 517, 527, 543, 561, 573, 579, 581, 595, 597, 607, 617, 619, 639,
645, 649, 653, 685, 701, 709, 737, 739, 745, 747, 773, 817. See also
God, con- sciousness of grace of 64, 66, 82, 205, 255, 289, 327, 429,
497, 549, 631, 749, 789, 797, 825 kingdom of 229, 233, 273, 351, 435,
447, 581, 627 mercy of 60, 107, 111, 129, 171, 225, 241, 261, 267, 277,
289, 327, 355, 359, 379, 391, 395, 431, 435, 449, 465, 469, 471, 473,
583, 585, 625, 641, 645, 647, 657, 701, 717, 771, 807 messenger(s) of
See messengers (in Index of Terms) obedience to 76, 185, 231, 235, 273,
311, 329, 333, 343, 351, 385, 393, 395, 401, 409, 431, 447, 453, 467,
473, 493, 497, 517, 527, 559, 569, 573, 625, 641, 667, 691, 783, 799,
811 oneness of, unity of 75, 105, 107, 233, 241, 297, 369, 375, 383,
407, 423, 449, 749, 825 power of 77, 107, 113, 115, 207, 229, 233, 273,
275, 279, 331, 333, 335, 343, 361, 371, 375, 413, 419, 421, 427, 429,
475, 489, 499, 577, 581, 627, 647, 749, 803 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
names and places 947 praise of 56, 59--61, 64--67, 69, 71--76, 78, 99,
107, 109, 115, 133, 161, 171, 173, 205, 227, 233, 241, 243, 249, 253,
255, 265, 269, 285, 287, 289, 313, 343, 351, 355, 359, 361, 369, 389,
405, 407, 409, 413, 415, 419, 433, 437, 439, 461, 467, 491, 495, 539,
545, 703, 825 proof of 74, 91, 113, 139, 203, 217, 229, 239, 269, 327,
365, 395, 397, 407, 411, 415, 433, 601, 723 prophets of See prophets (in
Index of terms) punishment of 115, 129, 141, 177, 207, 213, 221, 225,
251, 261, 279, 327, 329, 333, 341, 355, 391, 431, 435, 441, 445, 451,
463, 477, 479, 497, 535, 551, 573, 581, 623, 627, 645, 653, 661, 689,
697, 701, 703, 725, 745, 749, 765, 771, 773, 793, 797, 805 return to
147, 151, 155, 167, 213, 271, 273, 287, 301, 311, 343, 407, 413, 415,
429, 471, 479, 517, 579, 595, 607, 615, 647, 677, 691, 703, 705, 739,
741, 801 servants of passim signs of 113, 173, 229, 231, 233, 265, 269,
327, 355, 403, 409, 415, 493, 743 threat of 697 throne of 109, 115, 235,
361, 409, 415 unity of See God, oneness of Ḥāḍirīn 573, (747n2) Hajar
563 al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf al-Thaqafī 293, (179n5, 795n3) Ḥakīm ibn Jabalah
al-ʿAbdī (335n4) Ḥamal ibn Badr 571 Ḥamal ibn Saʿd al-ʿAshīrah (571n3)
Hammām 75, 461, 465, (715n1, 783n4) Ḥamzah ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib 539,
(179n2, 565n4, 567n3) Ḥanẓalah ibn Abī Sufyān (541n3, 571n4, 661n4) Ḥarb
ibn Shuraḥbīl al-Shibāmī 781 Ḥarb ibn Umayyah ibn ʿAbd Shams 547
al-Ḥārith (al-Aʿwar) al-Hamdānī 88, 667, (709n1, 777n3) al-Ḥārith ibn
Ḥawṭal-Laythī 761, 763 (The) Harlot (Ar. al-Nābighah) 215, (405n4)
Ḥarūriyyah (sing. Ḥarūrī), Ḥarūrāʾ 703 al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī 77, 83, 86, 90,
121, 195, 485, 555, 573, 607, 617, 689, 743, 805, (125n4, 153n2, 193n1,
381n3, 531n1, 567n4, 609n2, 651n2, 659n1, 679n1, 699n5, 747n2, 769n4,
775n3, 801n1) Hāshim ibn ʿAbd Manāf 547 Banū 90, 329, 571, 711 (501n2,
565n4, 567n1, 567n6) Hāshim ibn ʿUtbah al-Mirqāl 62, 191 Ḥassān (or
Ashras) ibn Ḥassān al-Bakrī al- Balawī 147, (761n1) Ḥassān ibn Thābit
al-Anṣārī (319n1) Ḥātim al-Ṭāʾī (613n2) Hawāzin 161, 759
He-of-the-Two-Wings 565. See also Jaʿfar ibn Abī Ṭālib
He-who-Soars-in-Paradise 565. See also Jaʿfar ibn Abī Ṭālib Ḥijāz 613,
(607n1) Ḥimyar 535 Ḥirāʾ 457 Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (197n4) Hishām ibn
Muḥammad ibn al-Sāʾib al-Kalbī 673 Hīt 87, 655 House of God See Kaʿbah
Ḥudaybiyyah (471n1) Ḥujr ibn ʿAdī 84, (483n1, 599n3) Ḥulwān 87, 653
Ḥunayn, Battle of Ḥunayn 759, (161n3) Ḥurayth 81, 88 al-Ḥuṣayn (or
al-Ḥuḍayn) ibn al-Mundhir al-Raqāshī (699n4) al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī 86, 121,
195, 413, 485, 555, 607, 617, (153n2, 567n4, 729n3) Iblīs (Eng. Lucifer)
75, 82, 111, 439, 441, 443, 445, 449, 451, 549, 669 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd
(Abbr. "Ḥ", passim) Ibn Abī Rāfiʿ See ʿUbaydallāh ibn Abī Rāfiʿ Ibn
al-ʿAbbās See ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās Ibn al-Aʿrābī 811 Ibn al-Ḥaḍramī
See ʿAbdallāh ibn al- Ḥaḍramī Ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah See Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī
ibn Abī Ṭālib Ibn al-Kawwāʾ (265n1, 779n4) Ibn al-Sikkīt 123 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 948 index of names and
places Ibn al-Tayyihān Abū al-Haytham al-Anṣārī 413 Ibn al-Zubayr See
ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Zubayr Ibn Funduq al-Bayhaqī (Abbr. "F", passim) Ibn
Ḥunayf See ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf al- Anṣārī Ibn Masʿūd See ʿAbdallāh ibn
Masʿūd Ibn Muljam (or Ibn Muljim) al-Murādī 62, 413, 553, 617, (165n3,
183n4, 735n5) Ibn Nubātah al-Saʿdī al-Khaṭīb (433n6) Ibn ʿUmar See
ʿAbdallāh ibn ʿUmar ʿIkrimah ibn Abī Jahl (459n3) ʿImrān ibn al-Ḥuṣayn
al-Khuzāʿī 647 Imruʾ al-Qays 815, (369n1) Iraq 70, 80, 84, 153, 169,
545, 547, (125n4, 161n4, 165n1, 183n1, 197n4, 215n1, 259n1, 293n1,
307n4, 385n2, 543n4, 609n2, 617n1, 651n3, 653n2, 655n1, 669n1, 689n1,
773n2, 795n3) Isaac (Ar. Isḥāq) 453 Ishmael (Ar. Ismāʿīl) 453 Iskāfī,
Abū Jaʿfar 647 Israelites, children of Israel 381, 453 Iṣṭakhr 88,
(669n2) Jābir ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Anṣārī 92, 119, (795n1) Jaʿdah ibn
Hubayrah al-Makhzūmī 407, (521n5) Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq 227, (131n3, 719n2)
Jaʿfar ibn Abī Ṭālib 539, (565n5) Jāḥiẓ 157 Jarīr (Umayyad poet) 101
Jarīr ibn ʿAbdallāh al-Bajalī 60, 80--81, 169, 539, (537n1, 537n3,
541n1, 795n1) Jāriyah ibn Qudāmah al-Saʿdī 83, (571n6) al-Jārūd al-ʿAbdī
669 Jesus (Ar. ʿĪsā) 72, 90, 363, (201n1, 811n3) Jibrīl See Gabriel
Jumaḥ 501 Jumayḥibn al-Sharīd al-Taghlibī (365n1) Kaʿbah 91, 611, 765,
(115n1, 201n1, 391n3, 567n3) Kalb 309 Khabbāb ibn al-Aratt 691, (715n2)
Khadījah bint Khuwaylid 459 Khālid ibn al-Walīd 137 Kharijites 60, 62,
64, 68--69, 74, 81, 89, 165, 181, 183, 201, 299, 303, 305, 407, 419,
675, 703, 735, 781, 809, (137n1, 159n1, 161n4, 163n1, 297n1, 307n1,
401n3, 433n6, 457nn1--2, 711n3, 731n2, 779n4, 807n1) Khaybar, Battle of
Khaybar (613n1) al-Khirrīt ibn Rāshid al-Nājī (407n1) Khurasan (485n3)
Khushnūshak (689n1) al-Khuṭbah/Khuṭbat al-Ashbāḥ(Ethereal Forms) 65, 227
al-Gharrāʾ (The Radiant Oration) 64, 205, 213 (187n1, 419n3) al-Qāṣiʿah
(The Crushing Oration) 75, 439 (571n6) al-Shiqshiqiyyah (The
Camel-Stallion's Roar) 56, 119 (319n6, 517n4) al-Wasīlah (The
Intercessor) (329n4, 695n2, 707n3, 711n1, 733n2, 785n1, 793n5) Khuzaymah
ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī (413n1) King of Martyrs 565. See also Ḥamzah ibn
ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib Kirman (or Kerman) 551 Kitāb al-Bayān wa-l-tabyīn (by
Jāḥiẓ) 157 (131n3, 761n4) Gharīb al-ḥadīth (by Abū ʿUbayd) (755n1)
Iṣlāḥal-manṭiq (by Ibn Sikkīt) 123 al-Jamal (by Wāqidī) 673
al-Khaṣāʾiṣ(by Raḍī) 139 (99nn1--2) al-Maghāzī (by Saʿīd ibn Yaḥyā
al-Umawī) 675 Majāzāt al-āthār al-nabawiyyah (by Raḍī) 821 al-Maqāmāt
(by Abū Jaʿfar al-Iskāfī) 647 al-Muqtaḍab (by Mubarrad) 821 Kufa, Kufan
58, 61, 63, 74, 80--81, 87--88, 91, 137, 143, 171, 227, 251, 257, 323,
407, 531, 533, 651, 659, 709, 715, 781 (and passim in footnotes) Kulayb
al-Jarmī 387 Kumayl ibn Ziyād al-Nakhaʿī 87, 91, 655, 721, 749 Laylā
bint Masʿūd (367n3) Lion- of-God 7, 567. See also Ḥamzah ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of names and
places 949 of-the-Alliances 567 Lucifer See Iblīs Madāʾin (201n2, 543n4,
665n4, 711n4) Madhḥij 603 Mahdī (337n3, 753n1) Makhzūm 90, 711 Mālik
(angel who guards the gates of Hell) 417 Mālik ibn al-Ḥārith al-Ashtar
al-Nakhaʿī 81, 86, 545, 603, 625, 655, 813, (163n4, 617n1) Maʾmūn 811
Maʿqil ibn Qays al-Riyāḥī 81, 543, (169n3, 407n1) Maʾrib (249n3, 381n4)
Marwān ibn al-Ḥakam 63, 195, 373, (131n2, 153n3, 197nn3--4, 501n2,
567n4, 649n2, 727n1) Masʿadah ibn Ṣadaqah al-ʿAbdī 227 Maṣqalah ibn
Hubayrah al-Shaybānī 60, 85, 169, (407n1, 605n1, 609, 609nn1--2) Mecca
3, 13, 82, 84--85, 88--89, 279, 365, 597, 607, 665 Medina 57, 58, 65,
66, 71, 73, 74, 80, 84, 88, 89, 131, 153, 375, 525, 531, 649, 669, 673
Messiah 707, (321n1, 337n3, 753n1) Michael (Ar. Mīkāʾīl) 409, 455
Mīkāʾīl See Michael Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym al-Azdī 83, (559n1) al-Miqdād ibn
ʿAmr (al-Aswad) al-Baḥrāʾī (487n1, 769n4) Miracle of the Tree (459n1)
Moses (Ar. Mūsā) 72, 75, 125, 363, 409, 445, (197n5, 327n3)
Most-Virtuous-Woman-of-all-People 567. See also Fāṭimah al-Zahrāʾ Mosul
(543n4) Muʿāwiyah 59--61, 74, 76--77, 80--86, 88--89, 143, 147, 157,
169, 175, 183, 215, 251, 405, 479, 537, 539, 541, 547, 549, 563, 573,
595, 601, 609, 611, 619, 649, 659, 663, 669, 671, 673, 697, 761 (and
passim in footnotes) Muḍar 457 al-Mughīrah ibn al-Akhnas al-Thaqafī 69,
317 al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah al-Thaqafī 803, (179n5, 649n2, 657n1)
Muḥammad, the Prophet, Messenger of God 56, 59--63, 65--67, 69--76,
78--81, 83, 87, 91, 99, 113, 115, 117, 125, 127, 131, 135, 139, 145,
157, 161, 163, 171, 177, 179, 189, 191, 193, 195, 199, 205, 217, 221,
225, 227, 229, 239, 245, 247, 249, 251, 255, 257, 261, 263, 265, 269,
277, 279, 285, 291, 295, 299, 303, 305, 309, 313, 315, 323, 333, 337,
339, 341, 347, 353, 355, 359, 361, 363, 365, 367, 373, 383, 385, 389,
391, 395, 399, 403, 415, 419, 433, 435, 437, 455, 457, 459, 461, 467,
469, 471, 475, 477, 479, 483, 485, 487, 489, 491, 493, 513, 521, 523,
525, 527, 539, 547, 551, 553, 555, 559, 563, 565, 567, 569, 581, 601,
613, 617, 619, 631, 633, 639, 641, 647, 651, 655, 657, 659, 661, 675,
683, 691, 701, 703, 713, 733, 745, 759, 765, 771, 777, 779, 791, 811,
821, 825 (and passim in foot- notes) Family of (Ar. Āl Muḥammad, Ahl
al-bayt) 56, 64, 71, 79--80, 83, 117, 221, 247, 251, 297, 339, 523, 527,
533, 709 (131n3, 171n4, 189n2, 329n3, 337n3, 551n3) Muḥammad al-Bāqir
701 Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr 62, 83--84, 177, 191, 195, 405, 559, 561, 597,
599, 625, 783, (145n2, 153n2, 165n1, 189n2, 499n2, 603n1, 617n1, 655n3,
813n5) Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (Muḥam- mad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah,
Ibn al-Ḥanafiy- yah) 129, 779, (573n2, 695n1, 799nn2--3) Muḥammad ibn
Marwān (197n4) Muḥammad ibn Maslamah al-Anṣārī (319n1, 681n3) al-Mundhir
ibn al-Jārūd al-ʿAbdī 88, 669, 671 Muʾtah 539, (565n5) Nahāwand, Battle
of Nahāwand (331n1) Nahrawān, Battle of Nahrawān 59--60, 62, 88, 91,
781, (107n1, 127n1, 137n1, 159n2, 161n4, 163n1, 165n3, 183n1, 183n3,
201n2, 295n1, 299n1, 429n1, 439n4, 663n2, 691n3, 723n1, 731n2, 807n1)
Nājiyah, Banū 60, 169, (407n1) Naṣībīn 85, (617n1) Nawf ibn Faḍālah
al-Bikālī 90, 407, 413, 705, 707 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 950 index of names and
places Night of Clamor (Ar. laylat al-harīr) (187n3, 697n1) Nukhaylah
81, 86, 761, (159n1, 173n1, 249n1, 543n3, 621nn1--3, 651n1, 653n3)
al-Nuʿmān ibn ʿAjlān al-Zuraqī 607 al-Nuʿmān ibn Bashīr al-Anṣārī
(165n1, 191n3) Palestine (317n1) Persia, Persian(s) 71, 331, 453. See
also Fars Pharaoh (Ar. Firʿawn) 339, 411, 447, 453, 535 Psalms (Ar.
Zabūr) 363 Qādisiyyah (331n1) Qarqīsiyā (Latin: Circesium) 655 Qaṣīr ibn
Saʿd al-Lakhmī 161 Qaṭīf (375n1) Qays ibn Saʿd 413 Qurʾan 68--69, 74,
76, 86, 88--89, 91, 135, 199, 201, 221, 229, 279, 297, 299, 303, 307,
317, 321, 333, 359, 397, 399, 401, 413, 415, 461, 463, 543, 617, 619,
649, 667, 675, 703, 707, 765, 777, 813. See also Book, Wise Remembrance
reader, reciter 523, 743 Quraysh 78, 84, 90, 149, 157, 189, 245, 329,
389, 459, 499, 501, 539, 601, 711 Qutham ibn al-ʿAbbās 84, 88, 597, 665
Rabadhah 69, 311, (125n4, 157n2, 317n2, 531n1) al-Rabīʿ ibn Ziyād
al-Ḥārithī (485n3) Rabīʿah 89, 457, 673 Raḍī, Sharīf 123, 133, 137, 139,
143, 145, 151, 153, 155, 165, 171, 173, 181, 183, 193, 199, 205, 213,
261, 267, 291, 293, 303, 307, 379, 413, 465, 481, 485, 487, 499, 525,
553, 555, 611, 671, 679, 683, 687, 689, 691, 699, 701, 703, 707, 709,
713, 725, 735, 743, 745, 753, 755, 757, 759, 761, 763, 775, 777, 779,
799, 811, 813, 815, 817, 821, 825 (and passim in foot- notes) Ramaḍān
279 Ramhormoz 81 Raqqah (543n4) Rass 411 Rāwandī (Abbr. "R"passim) Sabā
(Sheba) 249, (381n4) Sacred House 75, 447, 449. See also Kaʿbah Saʿd ibn
Abī Waqqāṣ (121n1, 319n1, 681n3, 763n2) Ṣafiyyah bint ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib
(153n4) Ṣafwān ibn Umayyah al-Jumaḥī (459n3) Sahl ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī
88, 669, 709, (611n1) Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ 63, (199n2) Saʿīd ibn Nimrān
al-Hamdānī 143 Saʿīd ibn Yaḥyā al-Umawī 675 Saʿīd ibn Zayd (681n3)
Salāmān ibn Ṭayy (691n1) Ṣāliḥ(Arabian prophet) (407n2) Ṣāliḥibn Sulaym
(691n1) Salmān al-Fārisī 88, 665, (487n1, 711n4, 773n2) Saqīfah
(Portico) 62, 189, (569n1) Ṣaʿṣaʿah ibn Ṣūḥān al-ʿAbdī (669n2, 699n1,
753n2) Shaybah ibn Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams (179n2, 459n3) Shibām (or
Shabām) 781 Shūrā (Electoral) Council 63, 70, 80--81, 87, 197, 323, 537,
693, 711, 733, 739, (119n1, 367n1, 369n1, 389n1, 499n2, 683n3)
Shurayḥibn al-Ḥārith 80, 533 Shurayḥibn Hānī al-Ḥārithī 81, 87, 651,
(543n3, 545n1) Ṣiffīn, Battle of Ṣiffīn 61, 73, 81--84, 87--88, 187,
267, 485, (127n1, 159n2, 163n4, 165n3, 215n2, 243n3, 297n1, 299n2,
301nn1--2, 369n1, 387n2, 413n1, 483n1, 539nn1--2, 543n2, 547n4, 551n2,
563n2, 573n1, 595n2, 607n5, 619n2, 649n1, 659n3, 669n1, 675n2, 697n1)
Solomon (Ar. Sulaymān) 411 Sufyān ibn ʿAwf al-Ghāmidī 59, 87, (147n2,
655n1, 761n1) Sufyānī (321n4) Suhayl ibn ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Shams 459 Sulaym
ibn Qays al-Hilālī al-ʿĀmirī (203n1, 487n1) Sulaymān ibn ʿAbd al-Malik
(197n4) Sumayyah (or Asmāʾ) bint al-Aʿwar 609 Syria (Ar. Shām), Syrians
60--61, 64, 68, 77, 81--82, 84--87, 89--90, 159, 169, 171, 173, 179,
191, 215, 251, 257, 267, 299, 303, 323, 483, 525, 543, 547, 609, 649,
651, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of names and
places 951 Syria (Ar. Shām), Syrians (cont.) 689, 697, (165n1, 177n2,
177n4, 249n2, 291n1, 295n1, 457n1, 471n1, 491n2, 545n1, 573n2, 597,
621n1, 655n1, 709n1, 763n1, 783n1) Ṭalḥah ibn Abī Ṭalḥah al-ʿAbdarī
(179n3) Ṭalḥah ibn ʿUbaydallāh 57, 59, 70--71, 73, 77--78, 80, 87,
123n2, 125, 153, 319, 321, 393, 481, 501, 531, 647, 659, 737, 777,
(127n3, 139n2, 157n2, 177n2, 335n1, 335n4, 345n3, 387n1, 389n3, 391n1,
431n1, 535n2, 619n3, 707n2, 715n4, 731n1, 781n1) Tamīm 82, 549, (101n1,
439n4) Ṭaybah 365. See also Medina Taym (501n2) Thaʿlab 811 Thaʿlabiyyah
59, (151n2) Thamūd 74, 76, 407, 479 Thaqīf 293 Tigris (Ar. Dijlah) 173,
(161n4, 183n1) Tubbaʿ 535 Turks 309 ʿUbaydah ibn al-Ḥārith ibn ʿAbd
al-Muṭṭalib 539 ʿUbaydallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd al- Muṭṭalib 143,
(551n3) ʿUbaydallāh ibn Abī Rāfiʿ 779 Uḥud, Battle of Uḥud 355, 539,
(317n2, 565n4) ʿUkāẓ 61, 171 ʿUmar ibn Abī Salamah al-Makhzūmī 85, 607
ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb 69, 71, 80, 331, 611, 765, (119n1, 179n2, 197n5,
215n1, 317, 319n2, 367n1, 371n3, 471n1, 485n3, 517n3, 537, 563n4, 603n3,
683n3) Umayyads 62--63, 65--66, 72--73, 87, 191, 197, 199, 223, 245,
263, 359, 381, 819, (119n1, 181n1, 249n2, 253nn1--2, 307n1, 311n2,
373n1, 521n5, 567n3, 567n6, 795n3) Umayyah ibn ʿAbd Shams 547, (459n3)
Umm Hānī bint Abī Ṭālib (311n2) Umm Jamīl bint Ḥarb (567n5) Usāmah ibn
Zayd (319n1, 681n3) ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah ibn ʿAbd Shams (459n3, 541n3,
567n3, 571n4, 661n4) ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān 57--59, 63, 65, 69--70, 72--73,
80, 84, 131, 153, 243, 197, 317, 371, 373, 383, 385, 393, 529, 531, 537,
539, 543, 569, 601, 649, 651, 661, (119n1, 169nn1--2, 175n2, 177n2,
199n2, 311n2, 319n6, 323n2, 367n1, 389n1, 391n4, 403n1, 471n1, 499n2,
565n7, 603n2, 619nn2--3, 635n1, 657n1, 665n4, 673n5, 711n4, 727n1,
765n1, 773nn1--2, 797n2, 803n2) ʿUthmān ibn Ḥunayf al-Anṣārī 611,
(389n3, 535n2) ʿUthmān ibn Maẓʿūn (769n4) al-Walīd ibn ʿAbd al-Malik
(197n4) al-Walīd ibn al-Mughīrah (459n3) al-Walīd ibn ʿUqbah (657n1,
773n1) al-Walīd ibn ʿUtbah (179n3, 541n3, 571n4, 661n4) Wāqidī 521
Woman-who-Carries-Firewood-to-Hell 567 Wise Remembrance (Ar. al-Dhikr
al-ḥakīm) 347, 767. See also Book, Qurʾan Yamāmah 137, 613 al-Yamānī 523
Yanbuʿ al-Nakhl 529 Yazīd ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (197n4) Yazīd ibn Abī Sufyān
(661n2) Yemen, Yemeni 89, 143, 377, 641, 673, (249n3, 369n4, 381n4) Zanj
69, 307, (259n1) Zayd ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī (317n2) Zaynab bint Jaḥsh
(367n3) Ziyād ibn Abīhi 82, 85, 551, 609, 611, 825, (179n5, 571n6) Ziyād
ibn al-Naḍr al-Ḥārithī 81, (543n3, 545n1, 651n1) al-Zubayr ibn al-ʿAwwām
57, 59, 70--71, 77, 80, 87, 125, 127, 153, 319, 321, 481, 531, 647, 661,
737, 777, (123n2, 139n2, 157n2, 177n2, 335n1, 345n3, 387n1, 389n3,
391n1, 393n1, 431n1, 501n2, 535n2, 619n3, 707n2, 715n4, 731n1, 781n1)
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Index of Terms This
Index lists terms from the Detailed Contents and Translation (not
footnotes). abrogation, abrogated act 113, 489 act(s), action(s) passim
adder 145 adornments 197, 283, 347, 363, 825 adultery 271. See also
fornication advice 81, 247, 249, 265, 317, 331, 351, 483, 537, 581, 591,
595, 699, 717, 739. See also counsel affection 88, 141, 271, 285, 455,
493, 503, 629, 659, 675, 721, 739, 741, 747, 775 afterlife 195, 275,
283, 285, 713. See also here- after Age of Ignorance (Ar. Jāhiliyyah)
245, 261, 381, 385, 443, 445, 455, 545, 549 alms, almsgiving, alms levy
(Ar. ṣadaqāt) 76, 277, 279, 449, 451, 477, 513, 559, 679, 719, 721, 747,
751, 765 ambition 251, 443, 497, 587, 707 ancestors 101, 253, 267, 415,
443, 445 angel(s) 56, 65, 67, 109, 111, 115, 177, 233, 235, 237, 273,
277, 283, 387, 397, 409, 415, 417, 441, 457, 471, 481, 509, 527, 717,
735, 807 of death 67, 283 anger 69, 159, 227, 267, 285, 297, 311, 367,
393, 417, 443, 451, 469, 499, 533, 603, 647, 667, 669, 675, 687, 729.
See also rage animals 61, 73, 83, 177, 199, 289, 421, 447, 557, 565,
607, 613. See also bat, beast, bull, camel, carnivore, cattle, dog,
goat, horse, hyena, lamb, pig, ram, sacrificial animal, sheep, wolf
anklets 147 annihilation 175, 207, 411, 419, 427, 429, 575, 585, 717
ants 75, 241, 379, 403, 409, 421, 515 apostasy 355 arbitration (Ar.
taḥkīm) 59, 61, 65, 68, 77, 85--86, 89, 159, 161, 297, 299, 303, 307,
485 arbitrators 74, 307, 401, 525, 675 archer 131, 325, 785. See also
hunter arguments 78, 203, 205, 389, 419, 451, 509, 511, 569, 601, 627,
771. See also proofs armies 61, 64, 77, 81--82, 84, 87, 155, 175, 241,
259, 281, 295, 303, 307, 309, 331, 389, 391, 407, 411, 433, 437, 443,
445, 477, 535, 541, 543, 545, 559, 571, 599, 627, 639, 651, 655, 765.
See also battalions, cavalry, forces arrogance 117, 211, 247, 317, 347,
439, 441, 443, 447, 459, 461, 465. See also pride artisan 421, 425, 437,
631, 639 aspirations 59, 65, 109, 151, 219, 235, 247, 281, 287, 441,
523, 527, 579, 633, 743, 783, 817 assayer 157 atone 209, 683, 703. See
also expiation autumn 381, 753 baker 735 balance 337 banner(s) 117, 191,
221, 235, 257, 269, 323, 329, 355, 373, 419, 467, 509 barley 363, 513
Barzakh 507 bat(s) 351 battalions 157, 245, 261, 295, 303, 543, 669
battle 56--57, 60, 66, 73, 103, 107, 139, 147, 151, 159, 169, 177, 179,
183, 215, 225, 243, 251, 267, 299, 321, 347, 393, 455, 473, 521, 533,
539, 543, 545.547, 573, 599, 609, 639, 649, 661, 681, 687, 759, 769,
825. See also fighting, war beacon 99, 219, 221, 233, 239, 245, 265,
329, 343, 419, 461, 469, 473, 475, 587 beads 331 beard 413, 697 beauty,
beauties 133, 205, 239, 253, 259, 505, 541, 585 Bedouins (Ar. aʿrāb)
267, 331, 343, 383, 455, 489, 609, 753 beetle 293 beggars 449, 559, 607,
639, 775 belief 75, 91, 107, 115, 179, 201, 209, 233, 269, 277, 311,
339, 343, 399, 405, 421, 433, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 953
belief (cont.) 455, 461, 463, 467, 475, 563, 567, 651, 659, 703, 713,
747, 817. See also faith, unbelief believer 92, 119, 165, 261, 271, 347,
349, 395, 399, 407, 429, 431, 443, 445, 447, 451, 477, 537, 539, 547,
563, 565, 567, 607, 613, 633, 641, 667, 679, 687, 691, 699, 703, 705,
775, 779, 781, 783, 791, 795, 801, 809, 825. See also disbeliever,
unbeliever benedictions 227 betrayal 167, 739 bigots 441. See also zeal,
zealotry birds 72, 119, 129, 207, 241, 271, 375, 423, 427, 447, 459,
813. See also cockerel, crow, dove, eagle, ostrich, peacock, pigeon
blade 85, 139, 155, 187, 301, 269, 603, 609, 647, 809. See also sword
blind, blindness 67, 117, 119, 133, 135, 163, 187, 203, 209, 217, 219,
221, 245, 251, 269, 315, 329, 373, 397, 399, 403, 405, 407, 429, 471,
475, 499, 503, 507, 579, 587, 593, 597, 669, 687, 733 blood 86, 103,
135, 139, 145, 147, 175, 177, 179, 241, 319, 343, 393, 399, 411, 417,
439, 483, 503, 519, 537, 541, 543, 553, 609, 619, 645, 651, 663, 675
-clot 211 blossoms 90, 239, 685, 711. See also flowers boatman 375, 379
bondage, bondsman 339, 417, 495, 499, 525, 555, 729. See also slave
booty 305, 609, 733. See also war gains bracelets 147, 447 brain 815
bread 363, 611, 613, 615 brick 253, 359, 745 bridle, bridle-strap 207,
257, 259, 343, 527 brigands 183 brother(s), brethren 68, 70, 73, 91,
165, 179, 209, 213, 225, 249, 251, 271, 283, 285, 293, 297, 299, 301,
303, 323, 325, 383, 411, 413, 441, 483, 559, 569, 571, 589, 591, 621,
625, 629, 661, 719, 727, 755, 761, 769, 791, 825 build, builder 287,
365, 411, 421, 575, 629, 717, 735, 785 bull 59, 153 burn, burning 159,
209, 235, 249, 267, 329, 417, 475, 509, 519, 613, 623, 651, 653, 661,
715, 759 butcher 199 calamities 59, 113, 125, 141, 147, 155, 161, 171,
179, 205, 213, 215, 221, 223, 225, 233, 239, 245, 269, 273, 279, 281,
299, 333, 341, 353, 369, 403, 429, 439, 445, 465, 479, 481, 493, 505,
507n3, 511, 517, 533, 573, 575, 597, 615, 627, 649, 657, 659, 661, 679,
685, 707, 709, 717, 721, 733, 739, 749, 771, 789. See also hardships,
trou- bles caliph 57--58, 61, 63, 79, 81, 83, 197, 481, 517, 531, 557,
569, 673 caliphate 56, 63, 65--66, 70--71, 73--74, 88-- 89, 121, 197,
303, 331, 335, 359, 383, 389, 483, 521, 529, 649, 655, 665, 733, 737
camel 57, 61, 63, 90, 121, 123, 129, 139, 145, 159, 165, 177, 185, 191,
199, 207, 211, 221, 223, 233, 243, 245, 251, 267, 269, 289, 291, 295,
297, 301, 315, 339, 355, 359, 373, 379, 403, 411, 443, 447, 467, 515,
519, 529, 531, 543, 557, 569, 579, 587, 589, 595, 601, 607n2, 615, 661,
669, 671, 683, 699, 747, 749, 753, 755, 759, 763, 821, 825 buck 89, 679
calf 199, 457 herd of 121, 815 herders 159, 177, 453 mare 76, 123, 175,
321, 323, 469, 479, 739 stallion 56, 119, 123, 237, 271, 407, 659
cameleer 805 camp 81, 155, 221, 303, 395, 413, 543, 667, 675, 805
caprice, capricious opinions 58, 121, 133, 135, 223, 263, 321, 341, 635,
675 caravan 137, 313, 357, 405, 513 carcass 245, 273, 341, 615 carnivore
271 cattle 115, 239, 269, 327, 347, 383, 387, 427, 593, 615, 723
cauldron 131, 353, 435, 533, 547 cavalry 57, 127, 147, 155, 303, 441,
443, 609 cemetery 715, 721 certainty 111, 117, 163, 207, 219, 235, 239,
285, 343, 357, 403, 407, 463, 467, 517, 547, 569, 575, 587, 657, 703,
713, 723, 725, 767, 795. See also conviction al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 954 index
of terms chameleon 467 chamomile 377 character 63, 90, 129, 141, 199,
223, 263, 323, 329, 457, 493, 577, 635, 637, 671, 689, 709, 713, 743,
771 charity, charitable 88, 279, 469, 513, 551, 643, 705, 721, 743, 795
chastisement 65, 68--69, 73, 75, 88, 217, 259, 455 chastity, chaste 247,
271, 463, 465, 693 chickpeas 611 chieftains 169, 301, 445, 451, 501
child(ren) 63, 119, 141, 149, 167, 171, 175, 193, 209, 211, 213, 227,
241, 257, 263, 327, 337, 349, 367, 435, 447, 451, 453, 477, 487, 513,
519, 535, 555, 571, 617, 631, 701, 703, 749, 755, 775, 789 Christian 86,
147, 623 clay 80, 99, 111, 371, 441, 451, 523 clemency 359, 437, 807,
817 cloud(s) 145, 235, 237, 239, 241, 263, 289, 291, 327, 337, 381, 409,
423, 439, 491, 519, 657, 683, 753, 757, 825 cockerel 375, 377 colocynth
(Ar. ḥanẓal) 145, 359, 499 colt 819 column(s) 117, 159, 409, 445, 453,
473, 475, 491, 721 command good and forbid evil 311, 353, 415, 455, 507,
575, 619, 687, 747, 797 (s) and prohibitions 167, 217, 233 commander(s)
81, 83, 86, 87, 143, 169, 189, 251, 281, 365, 413, 473, 485, 535, 545,
621, 633, 651, 653 Commander of the Faithful (Ar. Amīr al- Muʾminīn) 56,
80, 82, 86, 89, 99, 101, 107, 123, 137, 155, 157, 189, 195, 201, 227,
295, 309, 353, 403, 407, 461, 465, 481n1, 487, 523, 531, 533, 553, 603,
619, 621, 625, 655, 659, 671, 673, 679, 697, 705, 711, 721, 761, 765,
781, 797, 811, 815, 821, 823, 825 community 83, 99, 113, 117, 121, 133,
165, 169, 193, 223, 249, 277, 303, 305, 313, 317, 343, 355, 373, 401,
433, 475, 515, 541, 547, 557, 559, 563, 571, 605, 607, 623, 627, 629,
651, 657, 675, 749, 797 companion(s), companionship 76, 80, 103, 111,
141, 171, 193, 259, 291, 333, 335, 337, 349, 367, 415, 417, 445, 461,
471, 531, 553, 573, 679, 709, 715, 733 Companions of the Prophet 61, 65,
79, 251, 383, 389, 487, 489, 539, 563 compassion 70, 83, 86, 141, 323,
327, 405, 487, 509, 511, 549, 617, 625, 627, 631, 637, 641, 701
complain, complaint 68, 82, 135, 263, 305, 327, 371, 487, 547, 549, 635,
643, 655, 743, 761, 771, 809 conceit 219, 449, 461, 583, 675, 689, 713,
815. See also vanity consequence(s) 109, 463, 589, 629, 635, 645, 697,
811 consultation 537, 693, 711, 733, 739 contemplation 103, 711
contentment 92, 155, 447, 535, 693, 743, 787, 793, 825 conviction 90,
117, 127, 233, 287, 319, 593, 685. See also certainty cooking pot 271
coral 227 corpse 60, 78, 161, 275, 337, 501, 503, 713, 781, 815 corrupt,
corruption 59, 69, 121, 143, 155, 253, 307, 311, 313, 333, 401, 461,
471, 491, 497, 603, 605, 687, 711, 749, 781 counsel, counselor 59--69,
71--77, 83, 85--87, 89--92, 99, 101, 103, 151, 155, 159, 161, 207, 215,
227, 243, 247, 249, 251, 263, 275, 293, 297, 309, 315, 333, 365, 391,
395, 397, 399, 411, 431, 435, 445, 465, 493, 499, 511, 569, 573, 575,
589, 593, 623, 629, 667, 673, 675, 679, 685, 701, 705, 713, 717, 723,
725, 733, 769, 781. See also advice courage 61, 179, 189, 211, 299, 301,
303, 471, 501, 631, 679 course 68, 207, 251, 295, 297, 299, 357, 369,
385, 387, 393, 409, 435, 443, 469, 475, 511, 517, 633, 637, 643, 653,
717. See also path, way covenant (Ar. ʿahd) 111, 455, 539, 631, 643,
645, 663, 727. See also testament coward, cowardice 57, 127, 157, 159,
261, 407, 629, 659, 679, 745 cowrie shell 271. See also seashells
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 955
craft, crafting, craftsman, craftsmanship 77, 133, 343, 351, 375, 425,
427, 429, 489 creation, creator, creatures 56, 58, 65-- 67, 71--72,
74--75, 78, 105, 107, 111, 113, 133, 173, 187, 195, 211, 225, 227, 229,
231, 233, 235, 239, 241, 255, 269, 273, 275, 283, 289, 343, 345, 351,
359, 361, 371, 371, 375, 377, 379, 387, 397, 403, 407, 409, 413, 415,
419, 421, 423, 425, 427, 429, 437, 441, 451, 463, 467, 473, 491, 495,
501, 515, 517, 561, 579, 587, 597, 625, 641, 647, 713, 715, 725, 743,
807 crimes, criminal, criminal penalties 78, 211, 265, 323, 347, 369,
389, 441, 443, 569, 571, 585, 607, 629, 657, 747, 749, 765 crop 397,
423, 503 crow 377, 423 cunning 167, 299, 465, 479, 637, 711 cure 105,
139, 153, 251, 279, 297, 329, 353, 355, 359, 397, 407, 427, 463, 471,
475, 493, 509, 511, 589, 717. See also heal curse 69, 77, 137, 181, 311,
317, 341, 413, 483, 809 custodian 195, 331, 389, 501, 557, 703, 783
custom 129, 181, 689 damn, damnation 455, 507, 509, 571, 671, 711, 821
darkness. See light and darkness date(s) 355, 563 palms 181, 555
daughter 76, 479 deaf, deafen 123, 187, 207, 233, 251, 269, 273, 309,
315, 399, 435, 503, 507, 597 death, the dead passim pools of 767 debt
141, 275, 757 debtor 151, 309, 325, 559, 573 decay 209, 253, 275, 281,
425, 505, 513, 515, 717 deceit, deception 79, 84, 111, 193, 205, 219,
225, 279, 283, 293, 299, 479, 483, 515, 541, 559, 573, 581, 603, 645,
663, 751, 785 deed(s) passim. See also act bad, evil, hateful, mis-,
vile, wicked 275, 339, 357, 417, 431, 445, 495, 511, 667, 767 good and
bad 451, 567, 585, 687 good, noble, pious, virtuous 62, 74, 141, 155,
167, 185, 199, 265, 329, 409, 435, 447, 523, 619, 625, 631, 633, 645,
649, 703, 709, 741, 747, 749, 807 deliverance 213, 367, 787 demons 157,
233 dens 191, 207 desert 291, 449, 469, 479, 565, 573, 721, 753 desires
105, 151, 167, 195, 199, 209, 219, 235, 273, 345, 367, 393, 395, 401,
447, 453, 463, 591, 605, 661, 687, 707, 717, 717, 723, 739, 745, 747,
767, 785, 793, 811 despots 67, 181, 359, 535, 609 destined 165, 353,
405, 619, 791. See also fates, ordained destitution, destitute 239, 243,
289, 313, 429, 447, 451, 513, 559, 637, 639, 665, 713. See also
indigence, poverty deviation, deviate 209, 237, 267, 297, 299, 353, 383,
403, 437, 439, 573, 593, 621, 687 devil(s) 111, 235, 357, 417, 513, 687.
See also Iblīs (in Index of Names), Satan devotees 59, 92, 147, 225,
353, 361, 789, 805, 811 dignity 515, 557, 787, 791 Dihqān (landowner or
merchant) 82, 549 dinar 251, 533 dirham 251, 429, 533, 789 dirt 155,
199, 251, 281, 445, 505, 515, 615 discernment, discern 64, 157, 167,
179, 203, 205, 209, 217, 219, 223, 249, 259, 275, 345, 349, 361, 365,
475, 595, 597, 703, 721, 725, 737, 767 discipline 411, 525, 695, 791,
805 dispatch(es) 80, 84, 87, 109, 111, 173, 195, 267, 317, 413, 437,
531, 533, 535, 537, 543, 597, 599, 655, 783 disposition 133, 195, 231,
269, 577 dispute 199, 319, 633, 667, 687, 755 dissolute, dissolution
219, 587, 723 dog 197, 341, 585, 603, 619 doubt(s) 60, 90, 103, 105,
111, 115, 121, 131, 133, 163, 187, 207, 221, 223, 233, 235, 285, 287,
293, 299, 335, 393, 439, 449, 493, 507, 547, 555, 579, 595, 633, 641,
663, 687, 703, 709, 723, 767, 803. See also suspi- cion al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 956 index of terms
doves 115, 175 (strong) drink 159, 287, 429, 591, 657, 747. See also
wine drought 281, 289, 291, 327, 345, 387, 473, 581, 635, 753. See also
famine duel 563, 743 dunes 241, 379 eagle 307, 423 earrings 147 earth
passim East and West 363, 705, 773 easygoing 783 eggs 127, 377, 381 Eid
(Ar. ʿĪd) blessing of 809 sermon 59, 60, 61, 177 elite 627, 631
embezzlement 559 emerald 377, 379, 449 endurance 179, 397, 479, 711. See
also for- bearance, patience enemy passim envy, envier 81, 83, 141, 219,
235, 275, 287, 311, 385, 443, 445, 467, 569, 741, 749, 763, 787, 793
epistle 81, 86, 101, 529, 537, 621, 625, 637, 651, 653, 655, 657, 671
error 71, 103, 127, 131, 135, 143, 151, 163, 195, 201, 221, 223, 267,
269, 303, 305, 333, 335, 337, 341, 345, 397, 407, 415, 445, 473, 483,
493, 499, 503, 545, 573, 575, 579, 601, 613, 625, 633, 663, 787, 809.
See also sin, transgression eternity, eternal 177, 225, 273, 277, 281,
283, 301, 343, 357, 367, 369, 371, 411, 415, 419, 423, 425, 435, 443,
713 ethics 397 evil passim struggle against 90, 685, 687, 797 excuse(s)
61, 119, 151, 179, 333, 357, 469, 509, 511, 537, 599, 623, 645, 647,
653, 667, 769, 783 exile 69, 78, 213, 283, 311, 333, 357, 411, 501, 593,
679, 715 expiation 477. See also atone extravagance 82, 551, 731
factionalism, factions 68, 74--75, 249, 319, 335, 405, 439, 441, 443,
445, 453, 455, 467, 543, 787 faith 64, 68--70, 76, 84, 86, 90, 99, 113,
115, 117, 121, 129, 139, 141, 163, 177, 179, 199, 203, 215, 217, 219,
221, 223, 235, 237, 253, 265, 269, 281, 293, 299, 317, 325, 331, 339,
343, 353, 365, 373, 393, 397, 419, 457, 463, 465, 467, 479, 487, 495,
559, 569, 585, 589, 595, 603, 619, 625, 637, 671, 685, 699, 709, 711,
713, 721, 741, 747, 755, 763, 775, 779. See also belief falsehood 127,
131, 143, 151, 157, 173, 191, 261, 271, 311, 319, 325, 357, 511, 517,
643, 657, 667, 763, 817. See also lie family, families 56, 64, 66--67,
70--71, 75, 79--80, 82--83, 85--86, 107, 117, 141, 145, 171, 247, 251,
275, 283, 305, 329n3, 337, 339, 365, 387, 437, 477, 499, 505, 523, 527,
531, 533, 539, 541, 579, 591, 605, 607, 617, 619, 627, 631, 633, 635,
645, 655, 667, 671, 709, 721, 765. See also brother, daughter, father,
grandfather, grandmother, kin, mother, offspring, son famine 289. See
also drought farmlands, farmers 423, 637, 753 fasting 203, 279, 297,
449, 719, 747 fat, fat-tail, fatty 143, 293, 381, 517, 527, 557, 681,
805 fate(s) 70, 99, 155, 161, 175, 179, 185, 209, 211, 215, 273, 281,
287, 313, 329, 343, 543, 569, 573, 575, 589, 601, 613, 649, 683, 697,
733, 735, 739, 769, 771, 787, 817 father 61, 69, 75, 80, 83, 88, 113,
143, 161, 165, 179, 195, 207, 209, 211, 225, 299, 307, 317, 405, 429,
481, 523, 525, 573, 577, 607, 671, 717, 775, 815 feast 85, 527, 611, 809
feelings 64, 217, 275 female 291, 309, 375, 379, 409 fetus 211, 283,
341, 371 (the) fifth (share, Ar. khums) 765 fight, fighting 57--60, 61,
63, 69--70, 77, 84, 87, 129, 143, 153, 169, 179, 181, 251, 255, 299,
307, 309, 317, 321, 351, 387, 433, 443, 491, 545, 601, 691, 697, 731,
757, 759, 763, 797 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 957
fire, the Fire 111, 113, 131, 137, 201, 219, 277, 295, 329, 381, 395,
417, 421, 435, 441, 443, 449, 451, 463, 473, 475, 477, 493, 513, 547,
561, 603, 607, 651, 675, 759, 787, 793, 801, 811. See also flame(s),
hell fish 471. See also whale flame(s) 249, 417, 455, 473, 475, 513,
649, 759. See also fire flattery 78, 499, 515, 645, 787 flaws 361, 365,
679, 693, 741, 801, 809 flint 151, 161, 247, 269 flock 257, 323, 411,
557. See also herd flowers, flowerbeds 239, 377, 449, 595. See also
blossoms, chamomile, rose fodder 121, 613, 615 follower 58--60, 63, 65,
67--69, 73--74, 76, 113, 131, 139, 143, 159, 165, 173, 179, 187, 231,
301, 317, 323, 341, 395475, 479, 501, 511, 521, 611, 721 food 145, 225,
227, 239, 273, 287, 327, 351, 359, 363, 401, 409, 413, 421, 423, 457,
487, 581, 589, 611, 613, 721, 783, 791. See also grain, fruit fool,
foolishness 64, 161, 175, 215, 323, 327, 451, 497, 589, 593, 603, 645,
655, 689, 711, 721, 739, 741, 747, 771, 787, 791, 793 forbearance 72,
90, 119, 199, 463, 527, 679, 685, 739, 741, 809. See also endurance,
patience forces 195, 261, 301, 423, 655 forest 76, 227, 471 forgiveness
92, 111, 113, 115, 171, 175, 201, 241, 285, 327, 435, 449, 471, 493,
511, 517, 553, 625, 627, 649, 701, 703, 719, 773, 807, 813 fornication,
fornicator 305, 493, 747. See also adultery fortifications 147, 345, 493
fortress 321, 357, 439, 441, 455, 469, 475, 593, 631 free 169, 195, 251,
325, 339, 359, 417, 463, 555, 587, 701, 717, 745, 805, 817 Friday sermon
66 (139n4, 151n2, 153n2, 217n2, 253n4, 255n1, 291n1, 391n1) friend(s),
friendship, befriend 90, 99, 101, 107, 209, 219, 271, 283, 305, 311,
329, 333, 451, 453, 503, 573, 581, 589, 591, 593, 601, 617, 679, 681,
689, 719, 741, 745, 765, 773, 783, 789, 825 frivolity 215, 791 frolic
127, 215, 505, 575, 613, 723 fruits 99, 191, 225, 241, 247, 273, 289,
315, 325, 327, 349, 363, 365, 379, 397, 449, 451, 555. See also dates
fur 271 future 62, 219, 269, 289, 359, 415, 671. See also past, present
gallop 131, 205, 211, 237, 443, 531, 601, 683 gambler 757, 759 Garden
99, 109, 353, 367, 379, 381, 437, 441, 447, 449, 553, 793, 801, 811. See
also par- adise garments, undergarments 155, 191, 207, 223, 225, 239,
245, 277, 291, 345, 359, 363, 377, 407, 441, 463, 471, 517, 549, 599,
605, 611, 623, 705, 707. See also loin- cloth, robes, shirt gemstones
377. See also coral, emerald, pearl, ruby generosity 143, 195, 227, 229,
243, 267, 281, 413, 445, 449, 451, 453, 469, 473, 495, 509, 511, 595,
629, 631, 643, 693, 737, 739, 741, 747, 783, 813 gentle, gentleness 123,
141, 189, 195, 235, 463, 465, 509, 557, 617, 669 gift(s) 63, 70, 79, 91,
115, 171, 173, 185, 195, 205, 213, 227, 241, 255, 267, 325, 355, 361,
407, 409, 437, 453, 455, 469, 471, 507, 511, 513, 585, 627, 671, 705,
719, 723, 743, 775, 783, 789 girls 519, 703, 753, 755 baby- 453 slave-
131, 267, 389, 393, 607 glad tidings 66, 277, 695 glutton, gluttony 271,
613, 629, 790 gnat 241, 379, 409, 427, 807 goal(s) 78, 99, 101, 149,
151, 201, 207, 211, 231, 253, 261, 265, 317, 349, 357, 379, 397, 503,
517, 543, 579, 643, 687, 695, 803, 819 goat 86, 121, 251, 253, 311, 359,
419, 557, 607, 623, 661 gold 155, 225, 357, 377, 447, 557, 611, 799 good
passim good and evil 383, 809. See also deeds governing, governance,
governor, governorate 62--63, 65, 80, 82--89, 143, 191, 241, 321,
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 958 index of terms
governing, governance, governor, governorate (cont.) 389, 481, 483, 489,
501, 531, 535, 535, 535n2, 549, 551, 597, 599, 603, 605, 607, 609, 611,
617, 623, 625, 629, 631, 635, 635n1, 637, 647, 655, 659, 665, 669, 675,
705, 749, 789, 825 grace 82, 195, 505, 549, 749. See also God, grace of
(in Index of Names) grain 271, 273, 331, 449, 493, 513, 547, 609, 615,
639. See also barley, wheat grandchildren 209 grandfather 541, 571, 617,
661, 717 grandmother 717 grass 92, 121, 293, 387, 503, 557, 587, 613,
615, 791 gratitude, grateful, ingrate, ingratitude, ungrateful 239, 297,
305, 309, 323, 355, 359, 437, 439, 627, 667, 669, 681, 719, 723, 737,
771, 785, 813. See also thanks graves 78, 90, 207, 209, 275, 281, 313,
347, 353, 379, 431, 435, 471, 473, 479, 501, 503, 505, 507, 515, 517,
533, 591, 613, 615, 713, 771, 791 greed, greedy 121, 131, 153, 235, 309,
313, 363, 463, 467, 549, 621, 629, 633, 635, 679, 707, 709, 729, 741,
743, 767, 793. See also gluttony grief 137, 147, 171, 185, 209, 219,
259, 283, 307, 327, 359, 367, 465, 479, 487, 499, 503, 505, 525, 573,
581, 585, 597, 767, 771, 783. See also sorrow guest(s) 219, 281, 325,
485 guidance, guide, guided, misguidance passim gum 271 hadith 77, 135,
487, 527, 703, 821 hajj 56, 84, 88, 279, 597, 623, 665, 719, 747 halter
209, 213, 263, 527, 595, 649, 671, 683, 797 handmill 261 happiness,
happy 159, 259, 279, 355, 367, 403, 465, 511, 625, 631, 647, 665, 687,
707, 717, 739, 771, 787, 805, 807. See also joy hardships 61, 171, 205,
299, 353, 397, 429, 449, 453, 463, 467, 473, 539, 577, 583, 613, 655,
773, 789. See also calamities, troubles harmony 375, 451, 629 harvest
141, 215, 225, 315, 453, 521 hate, hatred 193, 219, 281, 307, 443, 711,
821 heal 67, 183, 207, 243, 269, 279, 287, 345, 357, 359, 365, 403, 437,
467, 471, 475, 517, 561, 763. See also cure health, healthy 78, 141,
209, 213, 247, 281, 287, 335, 365, 413, 417, 435, 445, 495, 505, 557,
585, 595, 711, 717, 723, 741, 749, 809 hearts passim heaven(s) 59, 75,
109, 147, 157, 305, 379, 409, 429, 433, 441, 509, 523 heir 245, 255,
297, 313, 409, 519, 573, 765, 785, 805, 811. See also inherit hell,
hellfire 131, 149, 151, 167, 185, 189, 211, 213, 225, 309, 329, 345,
357, 413, 433, 435, 463, 467, 477, 487, 489, 513, 561, 567, 583, 607,
685, 689, 697, 743, 781. See also fire herd 83, 121, 207, 243, 341, 349,
395, 477, 753, 815. See also flock hereafter passim. See also afterlife,
(this) world and the hereafter heresy, heresies, heretical, heretical
innova- tions 70, 133, 139, 173, 221, 263, 331, 343, 347, 349, 365, 373,
385, 397, 399, 413, 713 hermits 175 Hijrah (Migration) 75, 365, 433,
455, 525 honest, honesty 60, 79, 167, 275, 309, 635, 637, 649 honey,
honeybees 379, 421, 613, 779 honor 99, 111, 151, 165, 195, 219, 247,
249, 255, 267, 293, 301, 317, 325, 345, 355, 365, 373, 387, 399, 405,
415, 433, 475, 493, 503, 509, 541, 545, 547, 555, 587, 595, 621, 631,
635, 667, 693, 709, 749, 765, 775, 793 hope 72, 131, 149, 175, 177, 179,
197, 207, 215, 235, 241, 251, 255, 289, 293, 295, 313, 333, 361, 395,
407, 415, 429, 431, 453, 467, 471, 485, 503, 519, 539, 553, 561, 577,
579, 587, 589, 593, 613, 633, 643, 645, 647, 653, 683, 687, 695, 697,
699, 701, 707, 717, 723, 789, 797, 863 false 151, 185, 209, 219, 279,
283, 287, 535, 541, 615, 781 horn 59, 153, 177, 183, 257, 419, 457, 469,
543 horses, horsemen 147, 235, 259, 265, 303, 307, 441, 467, 541, 623,
755. See also cavalry, colt, mount, stallion, steed hot spring 477
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 959
(the) hour, last/final hour 58, 63, 137, 185, 193, 243, 261, 269, 275,
309, 355, 357, 365, 383, 427, 435, 439, 561, 599, 603 human 67, 72, 78,
111, 133, 137, 211, 221, 239, 289, 387, 409, 411, 413, 441, 447, 469,
477, 509, 511, 513, 581, 597, 643, 681, 707, 727, 733, 793. See also
mor- tal humble, humility 75, 163, 187, 211, 225, 233, 235, 261, 271,
273, 281, 335, 347, 409, 435, 441, 443, 445, 447, 449, 463, 465, 467,
473, 497, 533, 547, 551, 575, 579, 583, 591, 601, 617, 633, 639, 641,
711, 713, 741, 743, 783, 803, 809 humiliation 159, 181, 207, 245, 385,
443, 453, 559, 673 hump 63, 123, 191, 301 hunger, hungry 259, 277, 331,
363, 365, 423, 445, 479, 613, 655, 693, 707, 783 hunter 125. See also
archer hyena 57, 121, 125, 191, 335, 819 hypocrisy, hypocrite 64, 76,
117, 129, 137, 397, 399, 467, 487, 489, 523, 563, 687, 691, 699 idols
71, 145, 231, 333, 453 ignorance, ignoramus, ignorant 113, 117, 125,
133, 135, 159, 167, 217, 221, 225, 245, 247, 259, 261, 263, 271, 279,
303, 313, 325, 327, 333, 335, 337, 341, 373, 381, 385, 403, 405, 429,
435, 443, 445, 451, 453, 455, 477, 483, 503, 509, 527, 545, 549, 567,
573, 579, 637, 647, 649, 665, 667, 669, 693, 695, 707, 719, 721, 723,
731, 745, 767, 769, 779, 795, 825 illness, ill 211, 213, 273, 277, 281,
287, 359, 413, 417, 463, 467, 475, 485, 513, 519, 641, 685, 691, 723,
809. See also sickness illumine, illumination 163, 219, 233, 265, 269,
329, 357, 373, 491, 611, 721. See also light imagination 109, 229, 231,
351, 369, 379, 409, 419, 425, 505 imam (Ar. imām) 99, 229, 329, 333,
337, 345, 559, 563, 597, 605, 609, 623, 631, 739, 749 imamate 329, 391,
749 indigence 327, 463. See also destitution, poverty indigo 513
inherit, inheritance, inheritors 63, 92, 117, 119, 135, 193, 199, 203,
225, 305, 341, 411, 505, 519, 521, 583, 607, 611, 617, 739, 805. See
also heirs ink, inkpot 247, 519, 779 innovations 70, 133, 331, 349, 373,
385, 399, 713. See also heresy insects 387, 403. See also ant, beetle,
gnat, honeybee, locust, maggot, mite intellect, intelligence,
intelligent 71, 78, 113, 167, 173, 185, 207, 229, 231, 247, 295, 317,
343, 349, 351, 361, 367, 375, 377, 379, 409, 425, 467, 501, 505, 507,
515, 535, 573, 593, 607, 677, 689, 693, 695, 709, 711, 739, 769, 773,
809 intentions 92, 155, 249, 283, 319, 403, 437, 447, 539, 541, 577,
641, 691, 785 intercessor 397, 469, 695, 793 interpret, interpretation,
misinterpretation 69, 145, 221, 299, 303, 339, 445, 489, 579, 619, 645,
649, 675, 685, 701, 709, 773, 791 intoxicated, intoxication 339, 341,
347, 429, 687 Islam 59--60, 66, 68, 76, 115, 137, 169, 179, 199, 261,
265, 271, 277, 297, 299, 305, 313, 331, 343, 345, 355, 365, 385, 397,
405, 411, 419, 455, 457, 459, 473, 475, 477, 799, 527, 547, 549, 567,
577, 623, 631, 635, 651, 657, 659, 683, 691, 713, 747, 793, 819 jealousy
595, 713 Jew, Jewish 86, 197, 623, 683, 779 jewels, jewelry 99, 349,
377, 439, 615, 765. See also anklet, bracelet, earring, neck- lace jihad
59, 74, 147, 277, 413, 527, 619, 719, 747 jinn 409, 411, 413, 469, 513
joke, joker 215, 593, 815 journey 151, 171, 235, 277, 281, 283, 285,
315, 379, 395, 411, 447, 493, 511, 545, 581, 593, 669, 697, 755, 769,
789. See also travel joy 92, 239, 279, 355, 367, 465, 561, 581, 637,
691, 705, 749, 769, 783, 789. See also happiness judge, judgment 58, 66,
72, 80, 89, 133, 135, 153, 157, 187, 189, 195, 207, 223, 227, 247, 257,
263, 267, 307, 323, 335, 357, 359, 369, 373, 397, 419, 441, 455, 475,
479, 493, al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 960 index of terms
judge, judgment (cont.) 533, 535, 543, 565, 583, 613, 619, 621, 627,
631, 633, 645, 649, 655, 667, 671, 675, 691, 725, 729, 741, 773, 781,
785, 811 jug 175, 377 jugular vein 90, 707 justice, injustice 78, 86,
90, 105, 131, 133, 135, 147, 151, 197, 221, 223, 241, 247, 261, 267,
295, 307, 311, 319, 321, 367, 385, 401, 451, 475, 493, 497, 507, 511,
517, 523, 555, 561, 607, 617, 623, 627, 631, 635, 637, 639, 641, 643,
647, 651, 683, 669, 685, 741, 743, 761, 785, 813, 825 kin, kinship,
kinsman 58, 78, 137, 141, 143, 145, 215, 271, 279, 299, 321, 323, 325,
339, 343, 367, 373, 383, 389, 453, 457, 467, 469, 485, 499, 519, 521,
539, 549, 555, 569, 571, 589, 593, 595, 601, 617, 671, 699, 703, 733,
739, 747, 775, 807. See also family, relatives kindling 219, 539, 613
kindness 82--83, 243, 321, 323, 511, 515, 549, 589, 621, 625, 631, 633,
703, 729 kingdom 229, 233, 273, 281, 351, 411, 429, 435, 447, 581, 627,
743 knife 401, 499 knowledge 63, 75--76, 78, 91, 101, 103, 107, 115,
117, 125, 133, 135, 139, 149, 155, 187, 195, 199, 201, 213, 225, 227,
229, 237, 241, 265, 269, 277, 285, 309, 315, 329, 335, 337, 345, 349,
353, 359, 371, 373, 395, 423, 427, 429, 437, 449, 463, 475, 477, 491,
493, 511, 527, 531, 533, 577, 611, 663, 679, 685, 691, 701, 703, 711,
721, 723, 737, 767, 769, 779, 785, 791, 795 kohl 117, 323, 505 lambs 405
lamp 99, 219, 221, 233, 247, 261, 263, 265, 269, 329, 337, 345, 351,
353, 363, 369, 467, 473, 475, 507, 509 language(s) 421, 499, 517, 523,
625, 641, 821 laugh 283, 309, 369, 377, 465, 571, 713 lawful, unlawful
203, 263, 283, 287, 341, 343, 383, 391, 533. See also licit leader(s)
66, 135, 143, 151, 169, 193, 221, 223, 247, 249, 255, 263, 269, 271,
291, 323, 345, 373, 391, 405, 411, 453, 441, 487, 489, 537, 545, 557,
581, 597, 611, 629, 709, 753, 761, 779, 781 leadership 313, 391, 535,
631, 729 learned, learning 66, 117, 121, 133, 161, 187, 221, 259, 279,
449, 467, 475, 491, 527, 579, 589, 597, 649, 703, 707, 721, 739, 763,
779, 795, 825 leather 61, 171, 271 strap 821 legatee 223, 411 leisure
217 leper 745 lesson(s) 75, 103, 113, 131, 137, 159, 207, 209, 215, 223,
265, 275, 281, 287, 337, 345, 357, 411, 413, 435, 441, 445, 453, 491,
503, 553, 621, 637, 667, 685, 725, 735, 737, 773, 791, 805 letter
80--81, 83, 89, 99, 101, 529, 531, 537, 539, 541, 547, 551, 563, 571,
573, 595, 597, 599, 601, 603, 605, 611, 617, 619, 621, 647, 649, 651,
653, 655, 659, 663, 665, 667, 669, 671, 673, 675, 773. See also epis-
tle lettering 779 levies 559, 719, 757. See also alms levy, taxes licit,
illicit 74, 113, 203, 223, 275, 383, 399, 413, 429, 463, 487, 507, 555,
577, 607, 625, 635, 667, 785, 801. See also lawful lie 76, 86, 131, 199,
215, 219, 257, 271, 299, 313, 333, 349, 361, 479, 489, 575, 619, 821.
See also falsehood, truth life 67, 69, 72, 103, 111, 115, 119, 125, 133,
171, 175, 179, 181, 199, 207, 237, 253, 263, 275, 279, 281, 283, 287,
291, 315, 335, 337, 353, 373, 403, 411, 431, 453, 455, 461, 471, 481,
503, 505, 515, 527, 539, 541, 559, 577, 579, 585, 609, 613, 615, 627,
631, 649, 665, 667, 685, 691, 697, 711, 713, 715, 721, 723, 743, 753,
765, 771, 783, 789, 791, 797, 801, 815 span 89, 107, 113, 185, 205, 209,
217, 239, 277, 301, 313, 333, 361, 415, 427, 435, 463, 465, 475, 519,
587, 645, 671, 763, 775, 807 light 72, 109, 115, 123, 163, 179, 195,
205, 219, 225, 229, 233, 265, 269, 279, 283, 285, 295, 303, 341, 347,
351, 353, 359, 365, 369, 411, 419, 433, 441, 449, 459, 461, 493, 615,
645, 721, 755. See also illumination and darkness 415, 423, 425, 471,
475, 491 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 961
lightning 237, 257, 289, 501, 511 bolt 343, 409, 741 and thunder 343,
825 limbs 111, 117, 159, 231, 239, 283, 337, 351, 357, 367, 369, 379,
409, 421, 425, 439, 449, 469, 477, 505, 583, 661, 701, 741, 799 lineage
367, 443, 445, 609, 611, 631, 683, 689, 711, 747 lion 303, 311, 603,
625, 763, 771 lizard 68, 191, 301, 335, 351 loan 225, 417, 433, 479,
583, 637 locust 75, 423, 515 loincloth 245 loins 57, 129, 183, 225, 241,
247, 273, 585, 659, 739 longbow 191, 441 love 67, 227, 235, 273, 279,
307, 363, 397, 453, 473, 597, 625, 645, 711, 821 loyalty 60, 76, 129,
167, 281, 305, 493, 751 luck 693, 743 lute player 707 madness 243, 605,
749 maggots 209 magician 201, 459, 461 male 309, 377, 703 maledictions
193 malice 235, 271, 277, 299, 317, 335, 353, 451, 463, 547, 645, 727,
729, 779, 803 mansion(s) 225, 789 march 61, 64, 69, 71, 81, 84--87, 90,
157, 171, 297, 307, 525, 543, 689, 697 marshland 387 martyr(s),
martyrdom 74, 84, 141, 295, 355, 387, 437, 539, 565, 599, 647, 701
master 57, 127, 143, 185, 187, 245, 249, 253, 285, 343, 399, 517, 567,
579, 587, 803, 807 meadows 239, 291, 475, 573 merchandise 639
messenger(s) 70, 73, 75, 111, 113, 115, 137, 161, 181, 195, 205, 233,
237, 255, 267, 277, 285, 313, 315, 327, 341, 349, 403, 413, 415, 417,
433, 437, 447, 453, 459, 467, 471, 581, 659, 775. See also Muḥammad (in
Index of Names), prophet metaphor 151, 183, 759, 821 meteors 233. See
also stars might 64, 75, 109, 115, 159, 205, 207, 229, 237, 249, 253,
271, 273, 367, 381, 409, 413, 419, 427, 429, 439, 447, 451, 453, 455,
475, 477, 491, 503, 535, 567, 601, 631, 645, 793. See also strength
migration 75, 365, 433, 455, 525. See also Hijrah military 599, 621,
661, 757 milk 119, 207, 223, 361, 663 mimic 737 mind(s) 85, 107, 109,
111, 131, 147, 149, 159, 177, 203, 207, 215, 219, 223, 229, 243, 247,
251, 273, 277, 295n3, 311, 329, 339n1, 361, 365, 377, 419, 421, 427,
433, 441, 445, 451, 471, 495, 503, 507, 517, 523, 537, 545, 577, 579,
583, 597, 605, 609, 655, 661, 689, 701, 727, 735, 739, 741, 755, 779,
793 mindful 199, 211, 399, 527, 703, 717, 723 mine(s) 247, 277 mirage
469, 657, 689 mirror 377, 679, 791 miser, miserliness 309, 313, 629,
689, 713, 735 mission 65--66, 69, 71, 76, 151, 245, 305, 453, 673, 731
mites 241 moderation 82, 551, 721. See also temper- ance modesty 443,
595, 635, 711, 741, 787 money 57, 79, 131, 199, 305, 521, 533, 605, 607,
779, 809 moon 409, 423. See also sun and moon morals 399, 405 morning
78, 87, 99, 153, 251, 279, 339, 345, 351, 365, 395, 415, 465, 479, 495,
501, 503, 587, 651, 665, 717, 729, 749 mortal, mortality 187, 323, 705.
See also human mortgage 503, 573 mosque 129, 227, 717 mother 75, 80,
125, 167, 199, 283, 289, 339, 351, 371, 429, 457, 523, 607, 717, 755,
775 mount 72, 131, 281, 309, 363, 449, 457, 543, 569, 573, 611, 689. See
also horse, steed mountain 57, 67, 103, 109, 129, 163, 221, 227, 235,
237, 239, 241, 253, 275, 289, 291, 375, 387, 409, 421, 447, 473, 477,
491, 539, 541, 543, 639, 709, 813 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 962 index of terms
mourn, mourner 91, 123, 139, 213, 241, 281, 307, 335, 477, 513, 771,
799, 825 murder, murderer 305, 313, 347 musical instruments. See lute,
oud, drum musk 379 Muslim(s) 62, 75, 84, 86, 101, 137, 141, 147, 187,
197, 305, 313, 331, 383, 385, 389, 391, 399, 405, 443, 483, 487, 489,
521, 531, 539, 551, 555, 557, 563, 569, 599, 609, 619, 623, 627, 639,
645, 655, 663, 667, 683, 759, 765 mutiny 133, 195, 225. See also rebel
mysteries 61, 117, 125, 173, 223, 229, 241, 269, 273, 285, 291, 309,
337, 351, 361, 395, 507, 769 necklace 147, 239 need(s) 92, 115, 197,
207, 209, 235, 243, 269, 287, 303, 363, 371, 377, 379, 405, 419, 429,
433, 437, 461, 463, 465, 483, 485, 497, 581, 583, 591, 623, 627, 631,
633, 639, 665, 697, 715, 719, 733, 773, 809 neighbors 117, 175, 267,
281, 337, 417, 451, 465, 503, 515, 561, 593, 617, 623 night and day 387,
421, 425, 641, 733 nomadic 753 noose 205, 787 novelties 103, 701, 735
oath 113, 179, 245, 321, 343, 415, 429, 615, 649, 749. See also pledge
of allegiance (Ar. bayʿah) 70, 163, 319, 387 obedience, disobedience 65,
69, 74, 76, 80, 83, 117, 149, 153, 163, 185, 231, 235, 273, 293, 311,
329, 333, 343, 345, 351, 385, 389, 393, 395, 401, 409, 431, 447, 453,
461, 467, 473, 493, 497, 501, 517, 523, 527, 535, 559, 569, 573, 621,
625, 641, 667, 691, 721, 725, 749, 771, 783, 787, 799, 805, 807, 811
ocean 77, 101, 471, 489, 491, 797. See also sea offspring 241, 441, 445,
749. See also chil- dren opportunity 167, 169, 191, 333, 383, 583, 589,
593, 605, 615, 645, 683, 711, 747, 791 oppress, oppressed, oppression,
oppressor 68, 87, 131, 135, 139, 155, 245, 279, 305, 307, 313, 319, 343,
359, 393, 443, 449, 465, 495, 497, 513, 557, 569, 583, 589, 591, 601,
617, 627, 635, 651, 707, 719, 747, 785, 787, 795, 797 oration(s) passim
oratory, orate, orator 101, 105, 407, 487, 753 orbit 233, 387 ordained
74, 205, 233, 239, 275, 297, 339, 371, 405, 437, 489, 543, 631, 735,
767, 797. See also destined ordeal 209, 213, 449, 787 organ 209, 343,
425, 443, 505, 707 ornament 91, 121, 231, 233, 277, 297, 363, 365, 631,
675 orphan 607, 617, 639, 763 ostrich 129, 307, 423 oud player 707
overthinking 687 palace 195, 267, 273, 515 palm-fronds 143, 407 parables
113, 205, 207, 399 paradise 64, 72, 111, 131, 149, 151, 185, 203n1, 211,
217, 239, 265, 267, 277, 285, 301, 309, 311, 329, 345, 357, 363, 365,
379, 383, 387, 395, 397, 413, 435, 461, 463, 477, 561, 565, 567, 583,
685, 691, 717, 817. See also Garden pardon 189, 337, 359, 437, 509, 571,
585, 625, 627, 631, 639, 667, 727, 729, 739, 809 partner 57, 64, 82,
111, 127, 135, 139, 187, 215, 219, 231, 285, 319, 337, 347, 401, 409,
421, 429, 549, 553, 555, 559, 581, 629, 737, 743, 785 passion(s) 64, 70,
84, 87, 185, 199, 201, 209, 211, 219, 221, 223, 227, 235, 247, 255, 267,
273, 317, 321, 341, 345, 355, 367, 395, 397, 419, 495, 497, 519, 533,
535, 537, 561, 573, 575, 577, 587, 593, 601, 613, 625, 627, 635, 647,
651, 653, 671, 685, 693, 723, 725, 733, 739, 767, 771, 781, 809, 815
past 66, 74--75, 91, 207, 235, 253, 281, 289, 331, 335, 359, 403, 435,
437, 443, 451, 505, 517, 519, 575, 621, 629, 637, 645, 667, 735, 757,
761, 769, 773, 813. See also future, present pastures 265, 283, 289,
303, 345, 395, 427, 449, 453, 503, 559, 581, 607, 613, 661, 753, 791
path passim. See also course, road, way al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
terms 963 patient, patience 239, 253, 385, 393, 437, 463, 465, 465, 479,
483, 505, 525, 575, 593, 601, 623, 627, 633, 641, 643, 645, 667, 685,
693, 699, 703, 721, 725, 731, 737, 739, 771, 783, 801, 817. See also
endurance, forbearance peace 133, 233, 405, 463, 475, 535, 537, 539,
541, 545, 549, 551, 557, 595, 601, 605, 609, 617, 621, 643, 647, 649,
657, 659, 663, 665, 669, 673, 675, 791 of mind 793 peacock 72, 375, 377
pearl 229, 379 pebble 57, 125, 175, 335, 545, 661, 689 percussionist
707. See also drummer perdition 117, 151, 209, 219, 325, 365, 385, 563,
653, 753 physician 67, 269, 297, 505, 717 piety 75--76, 83, 88, 131,
147, 153, 199, 269, 279, 285, 313, 329, 357, 399, 415, 437, 469, 481,
509, 613, 671, 703, 709, 715, 793, 801. See also God, consciousness of
(in Index of Names) pig 745 pigeon 423 pilgrims, pilgrimage 3, 17, 13,
59, 88, 115, 279, 623, 665. See also hajj and ʿumrah pillars 90, 109,
117, 143, 189, 315, 337, 343, 427, 445, 449, 467, 473, 493, 527, 553,
555, 599, 609, 685, 687 pitch 189, 277, 557, 585, 587, 595, 615, 781,
787 planets 387 plantation 555 plants 125, 239, 265, 289, 291, 349, 363,
421, 613. See also aloes, colocynth, dates, date-palm, fruits, grass,
gum, indigo, palm-fronds, trees, vegetation pleasure(s) 82, 151, 195,
211, 225, 233, 255, 287, 311, 367, 379, 393, 395, 415, 445, 467, 497,
505, 515, 519, 553, 555, 561, 581, 587, 665, 713, 723, 767, 793, 801,
811 pledge, pledgee, pledger 57--58, 61, 63, 73, 79, 80, 89, 111, 113,
121, 125, 127, 131, 147, 159, 163, 195, 197, 209, 215, 225, 243, 283,
295, 307, 321, 323, 331, 335, 379, 383, 387, 389, 391, 401, 413, 415,
451, 457, 477, 501, 517, 519, 531, 537, 539, 543, 569, 573, 601, 615,
643, 645, 647, 649, 657, 673, 675, 677, 737, 767. See also oath of alle-
giance ploughshare 479, 503 plunder 181, 235, 259, 281, 357, 439, 453,
609, 663, 733, 775 poet(s), poetry 145, 161, 613, 759, 815 poison 281,
449, 711, 741 polytheism 91, 549, 747 pools 241, 327, 409, 473, 475,
557. See also death, pools of possessions 141, 229, 253, 313, 357, 469,
487, 521, 555, 775, 803 poverty 239, 279, 429, 445, 513, 515, 629, 665,
679, 689, 693, 695, 707, 407, 713, 727, 779, 785, 791, 793, 801. See
also destitu- tion, indigence power, powerful 83, 109, 125, 155, 187,
205, 213, 215, 243, 281, 313, 327, 383, 385, 443, 455, 459, 493, 495,
511, 513, 515, 547, 561, 573, 607, 617, 645, 651, 667, 669, 679, 693,
705, 727, 733, 735, 785, 793. See also God, power of (in Index of Names)
praise 56, 66--68, 70, 72, 75, 78, 92, 99, 141, 229, 241, 243, 265, 269,
277, 285, 325, 359, 365, 437, 451, 463, 467, 491, 497, 499, 507, 509,
521, 565, 569, 629, 633, 637, 647, 699, 711, 717, 783, 787, 817, 821.
See also God, praise of (in Index of Names) prayer 83, 65, 86, 115, 203,
209, 235, 251, 283, 285, 313, 387, 457, 461, 477, 561, 615, 619, 623,
641, 669, 703, 707, 719, 773, 813, 825 niche 697 ritual 76, 86, 227,
277, 449, 477, 563, 617, 623, 641, 719, 747 precious objects 765
predators 271, 347, 585 pregnant 63, 193, 443, 445, 555 prejudice 451,
641 present 211, 219, 285, 329, 355, 481, 777, 797, 811. See also
future, past pride 75, 101, 111, 121, 125, 237, 347, 439, 441, 443, 445,
449, 451, 459, 497, 503, 617, 627, 629, 641, 745, 747, 793. See also
arrogance prisoner(s) 195, 573, 635, 789 profit 74, 115, 133, 269, 287,
311, 395, 407, 437, 561, 639, 689, 709, 737, 765 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 964 index
of terms prohibition(s) 113, 623, 747, 799, 821. See also commands and
prohibitions promise 113, 201, 207, 215, 279, 361, 385, 397, 419, 479,
509, 621, 641, 645, 697 proof(s) 74, 91, 113, 115, 127, 139, 161, 203,
217, 229, 239, 251, 265, 269, 327, 345, 361, 365, 375, 395, 397, 399,
405, 407, 411, 415, 421, 433, 475, 545, 601, 723. See also arguments
property, properties 82, 86, 91, 121, 171, 175, 275, 287, 291, 313, 399,
513, 535, 553, 555, 557, 559, 587, 589, 607, 623, 647, 657, 667, 707,
715, 745, 749, 765 distribution of 82, 305, 553 prophet(s), prophecy 56,
61--62, 65--66, 70, 72, 75, 111, 113, 115, 133, 141, 157, 223, 225, 239,
247, 261, 269, 277, 309, 315, 359, 391, 411, 445, 447, 459, 461, 523,
541, 547, 697, 703, 777. See also Muḥammad (in Index of Names),
messenger prostration 115, 251, 297, 441 protected peoples (Ar. ahl
al-dhimmah) 631 providence 585, 591, 743 provisions 86, 151, 171, 185,
199, 207, 211, 217, 279, 281, 283, 285, 295, 315, 357, 395, 415, 417,
421, 481, 511, 519, 527, 541, 561, 583, 585, 589, 615, 623, 671, 697,
715, 717, 741 prudence 575, 643, 651, 731 pulpit 58, 137, 143, 145, 155,
227, 793 punishment 75, 113, 115, 129, 141, 177, 211, 213, 221, 225,
251, 261, 279, 287, 327, 329, 333, 341, 355, 357, 365, 367, 391, 421,
431, 435, 441, 445, 451, 463, 477, 479, 495, 497, 551, 561, 573, 581,
623, 627, 635, 645, 653, 657, 661, 689, 701, 713, 725, 745, 749, 765,
771, 773, 793, 797, 805. See also reward and punish- ment pure, purity
111, 139, 181, 199, 207, 223, 237, 263, 283, 293, 299, 329, 349, 363,
377, 379, 403, 409, 425, 445, 447, 493, 577, 579, 613, 713 Qiblah
(direction of prayer) 391 quarrel 315, 329, 589, 655, 753, 755, 791, 819
queen bee 91, 753, 779 rabble 141, 219, 267, 525, 721, 735 race 149,
151, 207, 209, 527 -course 265, 813, 819 rage 277, 331, 347, 465, 591,
667, 673, 707, 733, 749. See also anger raid 68, 84, 147, 149, 451651,
757, 761 rain, raindrops 58, 67, 70, 73, 107, 127, 141, 241, 271, 281,
289, 291, 309, 317, 325, 327, 345, 387, 409, 423, 473, 511, 613, 635,
825 ram 197 rare words (Ar. gharīb) 91, 291, 379, 753, 759 reason 265,
317, 323, 335, 361, 451, 689, 689, 745, 747, 801, 803 rebel, rebellion
56, 121, 125, 161, 177, 309, 391, 445, 457, 617, 687. See also mutiny
reckoning 167, 205, 207, 233, 241, 309, 333, 353, 357, 371, 441, 509,
535, 541, 607, 645, 797 reconciliation 60, 169 reed-pen 779 refinement
449, 577, 693, 709 refuge 99, 157, 213, 261, 271, 299, 317, 357, 387,
435, 437, 445, 455, 495, 517, 541, 579, 583, 701, 767, 793, 825 regret
111, 123, 149, 161, 179, 185, 275, 281, 295, 299, 407, 439, 477, 479,
599, 619, 627, 653, 707, 711, 717, 731, 807 reins 69, 121, 123, 131,
163, 221, 225, 239, 315, 375, 423, 433, 437, 445, 465, 467, 475, 517,
537, 569, 589, 615, 619, 625, 683, 689, 711. See also halters relatives
141, 193, 209, 467, 519, 643, 705, 747, 753, 755. See also family, kin
religion passim renunciant, renunciation 79, 85, 103, 105, 155, 157,
209, 283, 521, 575, 679, 709, 813 repent, repentance 149, 185, 207, 213,
239, 247, 313, 327, 333, 415, 509, 519, 527, 585, 627, 701, 703, 719,
723, 725, 749, 793, 813 reptiles. See adder, chameleon, lizard, snake,
viper repute, reputation 297, 637, 639, 727, 739 resolution(s) 239, 301,
347, 447, 453, 527, 693, 813 restraint 86, 549, 587, 611, 629, 679, 685,
687, 709, 737, 787, 793 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 965
resurrection 155, 167, 207, 265, 353, 369, 373, 435, 443, 509, 511, 513,
559, 583, 645, 653, 687, 717, 799 retribution 73, 245, 313, 327, 383,
401, 407, 441, 455, 701, 733, 747 revelation 70, 73--74, 109, 111, 145,
195, 233, 261, 315, 327, 359, 391, 395, 459, 471, 717 revenue 295 reward
passim and punishment 207, 347, 535, 697, 703 ribs 159 riches, rich man
241, 429, 447, 451, 495, 611, 691, 693, 701, 717, 743, 783, 791, 807.
See also wealth rider 123, 131, 225n1, 259, 343, 449, 547n1, 601, 611,
683, 753, 825 right(s) passim river 60, 161, 183, 237, 355, 379, 449,
453, 475, 543 road passim. See also course, path, way robes 75, 81, 123,
147, 219, 225, 277, 309, 377, 439, 441, 471, 541, 571, 671, 679, 703,
707, 709, 741. See also garments rocks, rocky 107, 151, 237, 269, 363,
381, 403, 407, 421, 447, 453, 455, 469, 491, 515, 661, 783 rope(s) 61,
83, 109, 117, 121, 125, 175, 177, 219, 221, 223, 231, 239, 267, 281,
293, 297, 303, 321, 335, 343, 399, 419, 435, 455, 467, 469, 475, 493,
503, 513, 571, 575, 587, 593, 595, 613, 627 rose 377 ruby 449 ruler 87,
165, 245, 249, 251, 271, 321, 455, 495, 497, 503, 533, 535, 541, 593,
625, 627, 629, 637, 639, 641, 643, 653, 689, 733, 761, 763, 781, 783,
797, 821 ruling(s) 86, 263, 307, 313, 401, 415, 453, 483, 489, 665
sacrifice, sacrificial animal 61, 177 saddle, saddle-pad 119, 447, 449,
611, 709, 825 safety 211, 247, 265, 313, 315, 321, 345, 351, 359, 413,
455, 501, 707, 711, 737, 773. See also protection sage 209, 629, 689,
701 sail 375, 379 salutations 76, 479 salvation 56, 125, 199, 219, 265,
353, 367, 507, 511, 581, 721 sand 161, 241, 381, 417, 447 storms 62, 181
sandal 157, 363, 407, 519, 671 Satan 57--58, 71, 115, 117, 127, 139,
173, 185, 189, 219, 229, 297, 305, 307, 309, 323, 329, 333, 341, 343,
407, 443, 445, 449, 459, 465, 467, 533, 541, 549, 595, 609, 611, 619,
645, 649, 667, 673, 675, 781. See also Iblīs (in Index of Names), devils
of the Stony Hollow 457 sated 127, 319, 693 scales 99, 115, 273, 285,
403, 609, 639 scorpion 319, 357, 467, 505, 695 scribe(s) 631, 637, 641
scripture(s) 59, 66, 113, 115, 117, 133, 157, 261, 697 sea 57, 129, 131,
155, 201, 219, 225, 237, 257, 349, 379, 421, 449, 469, 475, 491, 541,
595, 639, 769, 779, 787. See also ocean seashells 227, 241. See also
cowrie shell seasons 84, 217, 225, 421, 427, 597 secrets 101, 151, 211,
225, 239, 271, 273, 279, 327, 341, 395, 441, 481, 517, 621, 679, 685,
693, 727 sedition (Ar. fitnah) 66, 71--72, 75, 89, 117, 245, 247, 257,
259, 267, 271, 339, 341, 343, 353, 355, 373, 387, 415, 431, 433, 445,
517, 525, 549, 623, 663, 667, 679, 781 self-respect 693, 815 semen 211,
241, 815 See also sperm separation 209, 213, 275, 281, 297, 367, 369,
435, 479, 507, 581, 621, 717 shadow 86, 173, 185, 205, 207, 271, 337,
351, 561, 623 shame 60, 147, 169, 207, 273, 279, 301, 387, 415, 429,
431, 439, 455, 467, 475, 503, 545, 551, 559, 569, 575, 585, 627, 649,
657, 693, 735, 741, 781, 801 Shariʿah 91 shears 155 sheep 289, 291, 293,
307, 395, 413, 447, 615, 805 sheikh(s) 649 shepherd 349, 413, 587 shield
62, 147, 167, 183, 265, 279, 293, 309, 411, 473, 475, 477, 539, 541,
545, 605, 679, 693, 735 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 966 index of terms
shining spot 755 sick, sickness 105, 209, 305, 335, 471, 519, 595, 711.
See also illness sight, eyesight 179, 247, 269, 275, 315, 351, 363, 365,
373, 421, 471, 493, 499, 663, 769, 821 signs 113, 115, 123, 173, 209,
215, 229, 231, 233, 261, 265, 269, 327, 331, 337, 403, 409, 415, 425,
475, 493, 503, 743. See also waymarks silk and brocade 309 silver 227,
377, 533, 557, 623, 789, 799 sincere, sincerity 61, 107, 115, 141, 155,
159, 221, 247, 277, 285, 293, 347, 403, 407, 409, 447, 449, 467, 557,
559, 573, 577, 591, 597, 599, 603, 633, 637, 641, 673, 711, 713, 747,
775 sins 64, 70, 113, 131, 133, 145, 149, 175, 179, 201, 211, 213, 221,
233, 239, 275, 279, 289, 301, 305, 313, 323, 327, 347, 339, 343, 359,
381, 383, 399, 401, 403, 437, 471, 477, 509, 511, 549, 615, 683, 691,
699, 703, 711, 723, 725, 773, 783, 787, 807, 825. See also errors,
transgressions sky passim slander, slanderer 253, 261, 443, 603, 627,
635, 745, 817, 821 slaughterhouse 177 slave 131, 169, 187, 245, 253,
267, 275, 383, 389, 393, 499, 573, 587, 591, 607, 623, 657, 683, 745,
765, 783. See also bondage smoke 233 snake(s) 88, 513, 665, 697, 711
snare(s) 161, 205, 211, 221, 341, 449, 519, 615, 651, 679 sodomy 749
soldiers 155, 631, 641. See also warriors son(s) 64, 69, 91, 113, 125,
137, 179, 207, 213, 271, 299, 317, 363, 399, 405, 425, 445, 453, 547,
555, 563, 571, 573, 599, 613, 619, 685, 733, 749, 771, 775, 789, 807 my
dear son 90, 92, 575, 577, 579, 581, 583, 585, 591, 689, 779, 805
soothsayer 201 sorrow 92, 149, 239, 253, 505, 519, 573, 585, 783, 791.
See also grief soul 69, 86, 92, 141, 149, 151, 155, 185, 191, 209, 211,
215, 217, 221, 269, 275, 279, 281, 283, 299, 311, 313, 337, 355, 357,
367, 373, 379, 415, 417, 449, 463, 465, 467, 471, 495, 497, 509, 511,
517, 535, 547, 549, 559, 573, 577, 583, 585, 609, 613, 623, 641, 649,
651, 653, 663, 665, 705, 713, 717, 719, 737, 785, 817 appetitive 395
sentient 78, 501, 527, 625 spear 68, 139, 187, 269, 299, 301, 407, 443,
455, 539, 543, 547, 729, 773 species 111, 231, 421, 423, 427 sperm 273,
713. See also semen spouses 273, 367, 789 spring, springtime 121, 279,
377, 399, 475 stallions 123, 179, 237, 271, 407, 659, 807 stars 99, 109,
173, 201, 233, 247, 255, 267, 305, 403, 409, 501, 549, 705 stealing,
stolen 88, 239, 669, 745, 765 steed(s) 117, 131, 135, 185, 199, 225,
253, 271, 309, 445, 455, 475, 503, 511, 517, 573, 587, 753, 793. See
also mount stinginess 679, 745, 797 stomach 199, 297, 343, 347, 363,
421, 613, 615, 769 stoning 341 strangers 137, 175, 489, 513, 681, 693
stray 73, 75, 103, 123, 133, 181, 221, 233, 239, 251, 255, 259, 295,
303, 307, 325, 341, 349, 381, 385, 401, 439, 441, 467, 479, 495, 507,
517, 537, 565, 573, 579, 595, 657, 701, 731, 763, 825 strength 129, 141,
153, 159, 173, 259, 271, 303, 331, 361, 447, 451, 453, 463, 477, 479,
509, 511, 517, 545, 551, 623, 627, 631, 637, 645, 671, 717, 729, 737,
749, 785, 789, 803. See also might students 105, 187, 723 subjects 78,
83, 86, 151, 241, 249, 495, 497, 503, 535, 559, 617, 621, 623, 625, 627,
629, 631, 633, 635, 639, 641, 643, 645, 653, 761 suffering 113, 377,
449, 451, 453, 469, 473, 577, 639, 689, 691, 713, 787 summer 145, 149,
241, 377, 623, 661 sun 86, 211, 221, 351, 371, 377, 509, 599, 623, 773
and moon 109, 225, 233, 363, 387, 421 Sunnah 113, 133, 229, 265, 279,
303, 313, 321, 337, 373, 385, 413, 477, 483, 497, 553, 559, 633, 675
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of terms 967
supplication(s) (Ar. duʿāʾ) 61, 64, 67, 70, 78-- 79, 81, 171, 201, 229,
469, 493, 515, 517, 519, 545, 565, 721 suppliant 409, 509, 639, 695
support 61, 66, 85, 109, 117, 125, 141, 143, 145, 153, 155, 159, 179,
205, 265, 331, 355, 365, 385, 397, 399, 409, 419, 423, 427, 475, 491,
569, 575, 599, 609, 617, 627, 629, 633, 637, 639, 657, 659, 711, 721
suspicion 233, 241, 281, 319, 355, 525, 571, 643, 663, 677, 711, 741,
775, 787. See also doubt sustenance 89, 92, 141, 209, 225, 227, 239,
271, 287, 289, 327, 351, 353, 421, 423, 461, 515, 587, 671, 719, 747,
763, 767, 787, 789, 797, 807, 811 swear 70, 82, 121, 129, 131, 143, 153,
179, 225, 243, 249, 257, 359, 395, 429, 459, 471, 547, 551, 607, 609,
649, 671, 685, 749, 769 sword passim Mashrafī 159 talons 215 tax(es) 83,
165, 623, 631, 635, 637, 705, 739 collectors 80, 83, 86, 531, 555, 559,
631, 637, 655, 669, 707 land- 621, 625, 631, 635, 635, 825 poll- 631 See
also levy tear, teardrop 117, 155, 279, 375, 377, 435, 463, 467, 509,
525, 615 teeth 129, 135, 187, 299, 301, 321, 399, 423, 759, 789, 821
temperance 463, 467, 695, 747, 785. See also moderation tenants 225,
259, 469 tent 157, 253, 359, 557 test(s) 60, 92, 131, 165, 185, 205,
239, 251, 253, 261, 295, 301, 313, 325, 329, 355, 417, 433, 439, 441,
445, 447, 449, 451, 481, 581, 627, 629, 635, 649, 701, 711, 723, 747,
771, 785, 789, 799, 811. See also trial testament (Ar. waṣiyyah, ʿahd)
80, 82--83, 117, 277, 337, 409, 531, 553, 555, 559, 563, 575, 577, 579,
617, 625, 647. See also covenant testify, testimony 78, 107, 115, 161,
181, 185, 203, 217, 285, 299, 313, 375, 377, 403, 419, 433, 459, 465,
467, 471, 493, 533, 611, 635, 697, 749 thanks 67, 75, 203, 285, 407,
415, 431, 433, 437, 621, 719, 737, 745, 767, 783. See also gratitude
thieves 183, 305, 349, 635, 767. See also stealing thought(s) 64, 107,
209, 215, 217, 231, 235, 239, 257, 269, 277, 291, 311, 313, 327, 421,
423, 451, 467, 491, 505, 517, 525, 579, 649, 655, 657, 679, 689, 757,
781, 783, 791, 809 tongue(s) passim torch 207, 267 torture 211, 213,
277, 333, 417, 453, 463, 619 trade, trader 69, 78, 185, 245, 251, 355,
467, 477, 507, 589, 709, 795 traitor 137, 537, 743 tranquility 351, 793
transgress, transgression 113, 189, 209, 213, 231, 279, 305, 307, 323,
397, 401, 465, 509, 511, 593, 643, 645, 647, 649, 663, 707, 725, 799.
See also errors, sins transience 67, 69, 72, 367, 481, 713 travel,
traveler(s) 61, 171, 185, 253, 261, 291, 365, 379, 417, 473, 475, 581,
587, 593, 603, 695, 713, 753, 757, 805. See also journey treachery 86,
127, 193, 291, 339, 387, 389, 443, 449, 451, 457, 501, 619, 623, 639,
645, 651, 787 treasure 115, 195, 199, 207, 221, 229, 235, 241, 321, 327,
349, 409, 417, 447, 519, 583, 585, 623, 625, 679, 793 treasury 57, 68,
79, 80, 82--83, 85, 88, 131, 265, 295, 305, 389, 483, 501, 513, 551,
585, 639, 667, 669, 765 tree(s) 99, 191, 239, 241, 247, 251, 269, 271,
277, 289, 315, 317, 327, 331, 337, 365, 379, 381, 421, 449, 459, 459,
461, 473, 549, 595, 613, 715. See also date-palm, for- est forbidden 239
lote 263 trial(s) 79, 99, 111, 205, 223, 245, 251, 261, 285, 323, 327,
353, 369, 399, 437, 441, 445, 447, 449, 451, 453, 515, 521, 627, 653,
701, 703, 717, 767, 771, 789, 801, 815. See also test al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 968 index of terms
tribe(s), tribal, tribesmen 72, 75, 81--82, 89, 111, 137, 145, 149, 173,
303, 309, 367, 387, 439, 451, 467, 539, 547, 549, 557, 601, 603, 609,
661, 673 troops 61--62, 68--69, 71, 81, 87, 177, 207, 307, 331, 411,
413, 623, 633, 643, 655 troubles 473, 789, 541, 657, 679, 709. See also
calamities, hardships trust 76, 111, 139, 153, 159, 205, 217, 225, 241,
253, 255, 265, 281, 303, 311, 367, 395, 407, 413, 431, 433, 465, 477,
495, 517, 535, 555, 559, 571, 593, 605, 607, 633, 635, 639, 641, 647,
651, 671, 711, 739, 775, 799, 803 trustee(s) 73, 145, 195, 247, 267,
391, 419, 623, 825 trustworthy, untrustworthy 155, 251, 437, 595, 629,
637, 723 truth, untruth passim. See also falsehood, lie turban 307, 377,
649, 777 tyranny, tyrant 65, 121, 171, 217, 223, 245, 249, 253, 267,
271, 303, 313, 341, 359, 411, 477, 499, 603, 607, 627, 629, 707, 785
udder(s) 119, 179, 321, 519, 597, 679 ʿumrah 279 unbelief 90, 137, 181,
231, 397, 405, 479, 547, 563, 573, 659, 687. See also belief unbeliever,
disbeliever 137, 157, 165, 201, 305, 341, 455, 539, 545, 563, 697, 797,
809. See also believer usurp 381, 513, 607, 727 valley 369, 381, 409,
427, 447, 449, 453, 475, 587 vanity 235, 441, 629, 709, 729, 739. See
also conceit vegetation 237, 279, 289. See also plants veil, veiled 109,
137, 155, 173, 185, 225, 229, 233, 239, 269, 343, 351, 357, 361, 369,
371, 377, 389, 395, 409, 413, 419, 441, 469, 481, 505, 509, 511, 519,
583, 595, 647, 769, 777, 809 vessel 91, 117, 167, 193, 261, 499, 721,
737, 821 victim 309, 343, 391, 393, 365, 371 victory 57, 63, 68, 71, 80,
129, 143, 179, 211, 245, 305, 317, 331, 387, 393, 419, 469, 473, 475,
499, 533, 565, 591, 605, 693, 723 vinegar 359 violence 153, 257, 423,
355, 631, 731, 825 viper 381, 771 virtue(s), virtuous 64--65, 68, 75,
83, 91, 99, 101, 103, 113, 143, 167, 207, 223, 249, 309, 325, 331, 341,
363, 443, 451, 457, 459, 461, 463, 467, 497, 553, 565, 567, 571, 573,
577, 631, 635, 637, 645, 647, 693, 705, 709, 731, 747, 795, 803, 821
vitiligo (Ar. baraṣ) 777 vows 211 wailing women 209 war, warfare 61, 77,
147, 149, 159, 175, 177, 191, 245, 251, 257, 305, 313, 321, 331, 339,
387, 391, 453, 455, 485, 521, 539, 541, 547, 605, 609, 621, 627, 653,
765. See also battle gains 313, 605, 765. See also booty warriors 103,
145, 179, 295, 301, 317, 565, 571, 607, 613, 657, 781, 789 warnings 60,
67, 71, 82--86, 90, 137, 151, 161, 205, 207, 215, 217, 239, 275, 277,
333, 335, 347, 357, 569, 595, 437, 463, 505, 507, 511, 541, 575, 585,
695, 697, 789 water 61--62, 109, 111, 115, 123, 125, 129, 133, 145, 173,
175, 183, 205, 219, 221, 223, 225, 237, 239, 241, 261, 263, 279, 281,
289, 297, 315, 327, 339, 349, 361, 369, 377, 387, 395, 403, 413, 421,
445, 447, 471, 473, 475, 479, 491, 503, 529, 557, 565, 573, 601, 613,
621, 643, 707, 749, 757, 767, 787, 807 carriers 473 hole 61, 117, 127,
135, 137, 177, 205, 215, 219, 221, 265, 267, 269, 289, 301, 319, 355,
359, 397, 473, 475, 493, 503, 519, 553, 557, 587, 609, 615, 663, 697
waves 56, 109, 125, 237, 241, 257, 373, 437, 449, 467, 469, 473, 537,
595, 615 way passim. See also course, path, road waymarks 76, 195, 221,
225, 247, 261, 313, 343, 409, 469, 473, 475, 497, 573, 643, 663. See
also signs wealth, wealthy passim. See also riches weapons 147, 423,
623. See also arrows, blades, bow, longbow, shields, spears, swords
weaver 137, 735 wedding banquet 611 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
terms 969 weep, weeper, weeping 253, 275, 283, 291, 297, 369, 401, 439,
503, 509, 511, 521, 525, 681, 697, 781, 813 well 125, 211, 297, 745, 757
-spring 101, 229, 269, 271, 369, 399, 427, 455, 473, 475, 631 (The) Well
459. See also Badr (in Index of Names) whale 379 wheat 449, 513, 613
wicked, wickedness 165, 167, 257, 271, 325, 359, 361, 399, 465, 487,
511, 541, 571, 575, 603, 607, 619, 629, 635, 657, 677, 723, 767, 821
widow 193, 551, 607 wife, wives 313, 363, 389, 487, 595, 705, 715, 719,
807 wilderness 221, 291, 507, 613 will 82, 231, 239, 383, 393, 535, 649
wind 107, 109, 135, 143, 163, 165, 197, 239, 241, 245, 257, 279, 289,
291, 295, 337, 403, 409, 421, 453, 469, 471, 491, 661, 721, 815 wine
355, 379, 747. See also drink wings 109, 233, 237, 307, 351, 361, 375,
377, 445, 453, 459, 565, 595, 641, 653 winter 145, 149, 241, 363, 381,
623 wisdom 56, 63, 72, 99, 117, 139, 199, 209, 229, 247, 249, 269, 277,
295, 315, 339, 341, 345, 359, 399, 411, 437, 463, 475, 527, 575, 685,
687, 699, 701, 707, 725, 731, 735, 825 witness 57, 64, 66--67, 77, 129,
173, 195, 205, 215, 217, 231, 255, 257, 263, 265, 267, 285, 287, 291,
325, 335, 337, 341, 343, 371, 397, 403, 437, 455, 475, 477, 491, 505,
507, 533, 535, 559, 655, 781 wolf, wolves 165, 271, 307, 413, 607 wombs
129, 183, 211, 225, 247, 273, 283, 309, 371, 567, 609n2 woman, women 57,
63--64, 129, 131, 139, 147, 149, 183, 193, 203, 209, 211, 241, 251, 305,
347, 353, 379, 389, 425, 479, 513, 531n4, 545, 567, 595, 607, 695, 711,
713, 719, 745, 755, 757, 781, 807 worker 639, 735 (this) world, worldly
passim and the hereafter 69, 315, 595, 705, 785. See also afterlife,
hereafter worldliness 561 rejection of 64, 90, 203, 685, 707 worry 575,
721, 791 worship, worshipper 67, 71, 103, 111, 115, 157, 171, 229, 235,
237, 273, 281, 287, 333, 347, 387, 397, 403, 441, 447, 449, 453, 459,
461, 463, 473, 511, 559, 579, 669, 703, 705, 711, 725, 727, 745, 777,
809 mandatory acts of 641 supplemental deeds of 689, 769 worth 133, 157,
259, 305, 307, 333, 337, 363, 429, 515, 587, 637, 697, 699, 723, 745,
787, 799, 807 wound 119, 183, 287, 299, 301, 341, 443, 499, 675 wrong(s)
77, 111, 125, 139, 149, 153, 183, 203, 217, 223, 303, 307, 333, 359,
371, 373, 381, 391, 401, 419, 437, 445, 467, 471, 483, 487, 527, 569,
581, 597, 625, 643, 651, 655, 659, 665, 677, 681, 719, 725, 731, 763,
795, 797 yearnings 151, 167, 229, 235, 251, 463, 613 youth 99, 209, 211,
281, 293, 523, 567, 673, 699, 701 zeal, zealotry 387, 441, 443, 451,
655, 757. See also bigots al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Index of Qurʾan,
Hadith, Poetry, and Proverbs Qurʾan (direct quotes) Surah number Surah
name Verse number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 2
Baqarah 20, 109, 148 َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌTruly, God
is powerful over all things. 1.190.12 458--459 2 Baqarah 34ٱس ْ ج ُ
دُواْلِآدَمَف َ ا َ ّل ِإ اْوُدَجَس سْيِ لْب ِإ َ prostrate before Adam, and they
all prostrated except Iblīs. 1.1.5 110--111 2 Baqarah 117َ يَ ف ْنُك
كُوْنBe!---and it is. 1.184.2 424--425 2 Baqarah 156نوُعِجاَرِهْيَ ل ِإ آـَ ّن
ِإَوِهّٰلِ ل اَ ّن ِإWe belong to God, and to him we shall return. 1.80.12,
1.127, 1.200, 3.89 212--213, 310--311, 478--479, 702--705 2 Baqarah
197ىَوْقَ ّتلا ِداَ ّزلاَرْيَخ ّنإThe best provision is piety. 3.119 714--715 3
Āl ʿImrān 7ساَ ّرلا ِ خ ُ ونَ فِي الْعِلْمِMen rooted in knowledge 1.88.2,
1.142.1 228--229, 328--329 3 Āl ʿImrān 18الْم ُ َنيِ لِ ئاَقْلاَو ْمُكنِم َنيِقِّوَع
ِ هِناَوْخ ِإِل مْ هَل ُ اَلَو اَ نْيَ ل ِإ َ ّم س ْأَ بْلا َنوُ ت ْأَي ً ليِ لَ ق ا َ ّل
ِإ َ ا those among you who impede, who say to their brothers, "Come help
us," while they themselves seldom enter the fray. 2.28.4 568--569 3 Āl
ʿImrān 68َ لْوَأ َ ّن ِإ َ ميِهاَرْب ِإِب ِساَ ّنلا ى َٰهَوُهوُعَبَ ّتا َنيِذَ ّلَ ل ُ
ّيِبَ ّنلا اَذ وَالذينَ آمَن ُ ُ ّيِلَوُ هَ ّللاَو او الْم ُ ؤْمِنِين Those who have
the most claim on Abraham are the ones who followed him, and this
Prophet, and those who profess belief. God is the believ- ers' master.
2.28.2, 3.86 566--567, 702--703 3 Āl ʿImrān 85َ تْبَ ي نَم َ لْس ِإْلاَرْيَ غ ِغ
امِ دِينًاwhoever seeks a religion other than Islam 1.159 364--365
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 971 (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 3 Āl ʿImrān
97َ لَ عِهّٰلِ لَو ح ِساَ ّنلٱ ى تْيَ بْلٱ ُ ّج ِ ِ مَنِ ٱسْت َ ً ليِبَسِهْيَ ل ِإ َعاَط ا
ِنَعٌّيِنَغَ هللٱ َ ّنِإَ فَ رَفَك ْنَمَو َنيِ مَ لَٰعْلٱ Pilgrimage to the House is
compulsory for all who are able to find a path. As for those who
disbelieve, they should know that God has need of no one from all the
worlds. 1.1.8 114--115 3 Āl ʿImrān 102ُ ت َ ّقَحَ هّٰللا اوُقَ ّتا قَات ِ هِوَلَا ُ
توُ مَ ت ُ مِلْس ُ ّم مُتنَأَو ا َ ّل ِإ َ ّن ونَ be conscious of God as you
should, and make sure you die submitting to him 1.111.3 288--289 3 Āl
ʿImrān 134, 148 بِحُيُ هَ ّللٱَو ُ مْلٱ ُ ّ حْسِنِينَGod loves those who do good.
3.188 736--737 3 Āl ʿImrān 165َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ
دِيرٌTruly, God is powerful over all things. 1.190.12 458--459 3 Āl ʿImrān
198ِراَرْبَأْلِّلٌرْيَخِهَ ّللاَدنِع اَمَوWhat God has prepared for people of virtue is
the best! 2.23 552--553 4 Nisāʾ 17َ بْوَ ّتلا اَ مَ ّن ِإ َ لَ عُة َنيِذَ ّلِ
لِهّٰللا ى ي َ بَءو ُ ّسلا َنوُ لَمْع ِ ج َ َ ّمُثٍةَ لاَه يَت ُ َ ق ْنِم َنوُ بو رِيب
ٍ ف َ َكِئَ لوُأ يَت ُ وب ِ هْيَ لَ عُ هّٰللا ُ مْ وَ كَانَ اللّٰه ُ اًميِكَح اًميِ لَ ع God
accepts the repen- tance of those who do wrong in ignorance then repent
soon thereafter; they are the ones whose repentance God accepts; God is
knowing and wise. 3.124 718--719 4 Nisāʾ 48, 116َ ي اَلَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ْ شُ ي
نَأُ رِفْغ رَكَب ِ هِGod does not forgive being assigned partners 1.174.8
400--401 4 Nisāʾ 58ُ نَمآ َنيذلا اَ ه ُ ّيَأ اَي وا أَطِيعُوا يِلوُأَو َلوُسَ ّرلا
اوُعيِطَأَوَ هّٰللا ْمُتْعَزاَنَت نِإَ ف ْمُكنِمِرْمَأْلا فِي ش َ يْءٍف َ ر ُ َ ل ِإُهو ُ ّد ى
اللّٰهِ ِلوُسَ ّرلاَو Believers, obey God, obey the Messenger, and the people
in command among you. If you dis- agree over something, refer it to God
and the Messenger. 2.53.8 632--633 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 972 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 4 Nisāʾ 59َ ش
يِفْمُتْعَزاَنَت نِإَ ف يْءٍف َ ر ُ ُهو ُ ّد َ ل ِإ لوُسَ ّرلاَوِهّٰللا ى If you disagree
about something, refer it to God and his Messenger. 1.123 302--303 4
Nisāʾ 82مَا ف َ طَ ّر باَ تِكلٱ يِف اَ ن ْ ِ مِن ش َ يْءٍ If it had come from
someone other than God, they would have found it to have many inconsis-
tencies. 1.18 134--135 4 Nisāʾ 103كَانَت َ لَ ع ْ ى الْم ُ اًباَ تِك َنيِنِمْؤ اًتوُ
قْو َ ّم prescribed for believers at fixed times 1.197 476--477 4 Nisāʾ
110وَمَنْ ي َ عْمَلْ سُوْءًا أَوْ ي َ ظْلِمْ ن َ َ ي َ ّمُثُهَسْف سْت َ غْفِرِ اللّٰه َيَجِدِ اللّٰه
َ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا Whoever does wrong or oppresses his soul, but then seeks
forgiveness from God, will find that God is forgiving and mer- ciful.
3.124 718--719 5 Māʾidah 25ِ لْمَأ ال يِّ ن ِإ َ ن َ ّ ال ِإ ُك فْسِي وَأَخِي I
have jurisdiction only over myself and my brother 3.254 760--761 5
Māʾidah 93بِحُيُ هَ ّللٱَو ُ مْلٱ ُ ّ حْسِنِينَGod loves those who do good. 3.188
736--737 6 Anʿām 38ِهّٰللٱِرْيَ غ ِدنِع ْنِم َناَكْوَ لَو اًريِثَك اً فَ الِتْخٱِهيِف اْوُدَجَوَ ل
We have omitted nothing from the Book. 1.18 134--135 6 Anʿām 56ق َ تْلَ لَض
ْد َنِم اَنَأ آَمَو اًذ ِإ ُ ٱلْم ُ هْت َ دِينَ I should stray from the path if
so, no longer among the guided 1.57 180--181 6 Anʿām 95َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ نَأف
كُونَhow are you deluded 1.80.13 1.84.2 1.105.2 212--213, 220--221,
270--271 7 Aʿrāf 87ىَ ّتَح ٰ َوُهَو اَ نَ نْيَ بُ هّٰللٱَمُكْحَي خَيْرُٱلْح َٰ كِمِين until
God judges between us---and he is the best of judges 2.55 648--649
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 973 (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 7 Aʿrāf 89َ
تْفا اَنَ ّبَر ح ْ يَ بَو اَ نَ نْيَ ب ْ نَ ق َ اَ نِمْو بِالْح َ قِّ وَأَنت َ خَيْرُالْفَات َنيِ
ـح ِ Lord, decide between us and our tribesmen with truth, for you are
the best conqueror. 2.15 546--547 7 Aʿrāf 99َ لَ ف ُمْوَقْلٱ ا َ ّل ِإِهّٰللٱَ
رْكَم ُنَم ْأَي ا نوُرِسَٰ خْلٱ Only losers feel secure against God's reckoning
3.356 796--797 7 Aʿrāf 138ُ هَ ل اَ مَك اًهـَ ل ِإ آَ نَ ّ ل ْلَعْجٱ َ هِ لآ ْم ةٌ َ
ق ْمُكَ ّن ِإ َلاَ ق َنوُ لَهْجَتٌمْو Make for us a god like their gods! He said,
you are an ignorant people! 3.303 778--779 8 Anfāl 6ُ ي اَ مَ ّنَأَك َ ل ِإ
َنوُ قاَس ى ٱلْمَوْت ِ وَهُمْ يَنظُر ُ ونَ as though driven to a death they could
see in front of their eyes 1.39 164--165 8 Anfāl 28ُ مَ لْعٱَو َ مَ ّنَأْآو آ
أَمْوَالـ ُ كُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْ فِتْن َ ةٌ Know that the riches you own and the
children you beget are nothing but trials! 3.84 700--701 8 Anfāl 51ُ يِ لُ
هللٱ َناَك اَمَو عَذِّبَه ُ مْ وَأَنت َ فِيه ِ مْ وَمَا كَانَ ٱلله ُمُعَذِّبَه ُ مْ وَهُمْ ي َ سْت
َ غْفِر ُ ونَ God will not punish them while you are among them, and he
will not punish them if they repent. 3.79 700--701 8 Anfāl 51سْيـَ لَ هللا
َ ّنَأ َ ب ِ ِديِبَعْلِّل ٍماَ ّلَظGod is not unjust to his servants. 1.176.2
402--403 9 Tawbah 109شَفَا جُرُف ٍ هَارٍthe lip of a crumbling cliff 1.102.2
262--263 10 Yūnus 5ع َ دَدَالسِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَاب َreckoning and calcula- tion of
years 1.88.6 232--233 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 974 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 10 Yūnus 30ِ
لاَ نُه َ ن ُ ّلُك وُ لْبَت َك ا َ ّم ٍسْف َ ل ِإ اوّدُرو تَفلسَأ ى اللّٰهِ مَوْلَاهُمُالْح
َ ُ هْنَع َ ّلَضَو ِّق م َ ي اوُ ناَك ا َ ّم َنوُرَ تْف There, each soul will be
tried for what it did in past times, and all crea- tures will be
returned to God, their true master--- their falsehoods will no longer
avail. 1.223 516--517 10 Yūnus 32َ ب اَذاَ مَ ف عْدَالْح َ َ ل َ ّضلا ا َ ّل ِإ
ِّق الُBut what is there after truth save error? 2.65 662--663 10 Yūnus 34َ
فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ نَأف كُونَhow are you deluded? 1.80.13 1.84.2 1.105.2 212--213,
220--221, 270--271 11 Hūd 7ً لَ مَع ُنَسْحَأ ْمُكُ ّيَأ ْمُكَوُ لْبَي اput you to the
test, to see who among you performs the best of deeds. 1.181.3 416--417
11 Hūd 49َ بِقاَعْلٱ َ ّن ِإ نيِقَ ّتُ مْلِ لَةthe best outcome is reserved for
the pious. 1.95 252--253 11 Hūd 83ٍديِعَبِ ب َنيِمِ لا َ ّظلا َنِمَيِه اَمَوis
never far from the wicked 2.28.5 570--571 11 Hūd 88َ لْص ِإْلا ا َ ّل ِإ احَ
مَا اسْت َ طَعْت ُ ِهْيَ لَ عِهَ ّللاِب ا َ ّل ِإ يِقيِفْوَ ت اَمَو َوَ ت تْل َ ّك ُ only
to set things right as much as I can. My direc- tion comes from God. In
him I place my trust. 2.28.4 570--571 11 Hūd 89يِقاَقِش ْمُكَ ّنَمِرْجَي اَلLet
not your enmity of me drive you to accuse me of lies. 1.98.2 256--257 11
Hūd 95َ ب اَ مَك ... اًدْعُ ب عِدَت ُدوُ مَ ث ْAway with ... as the Thamūd were
done away with! 1.179 406--407 12 Yūsuf 53سْفَ ّنلا َ ّن ِإ ِءو ُ ّسلاِبٌةَرا
َ ّمَأـَ ل َ يِّ بَرَمِحَر اَم ا َ ّل ِإ the sentient soul com- mands vice unless
God shows it mercy. 2.53.1 624--625 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs 975 (cont.) Surah number Surah name
Verse number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 12
Yūsuf 87َ ٔـْياَي اَلُهَ ّن ِإ س ِهّٰللٱ ِحْو َ ّر نِم ُ ُ رِفَٰكْـلٱُمْوَقْلٱ ا َ ّل ِإ
ونَ Only unbelievers despair of God's grace. 3.356 796--797 13 Raʿd
15تاَواَم َ ّسلا يِف نَم ِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَ كَرْهًا all who are in the skies and
the earth, obedient or unwilling 1.183.4 422--423 13 Raʿd 38ل ِ باَ تِك
ٍلَجَأ ِّلُك ٌeach term is written. 1.105.2 1.181.1 270--271, 414--415 14
Ibrāhīm 4وَهُوَالْعَزِيزُالْح َ كِيمand he is mighty and wise. 1.181.3 14 Ibrāhīm
7ِ ئَ ل ْمُكَ ّنَديِزَأَلْمُتْرَكَش نIf you give thanks, you will be given more.
3.124 718--719 14 Ibrāhīm 30ق ُ َ ل ِإ ْمُكَريِصَم َ ّنِإَ فْاوُعَ ّتَ مَ ت ْل ى
ِراَ ّنلٱ Say: Take pleasure if you wish! Your last stop is hellfire.
1.28 150--151 14 Ibrāhīm 42َ ت ٍمْوَ ي شْخَص ُ فِيهِالْأَبْصَارُthe day when eyes
stare fixedly in terror 1.193 468--469 15 Ḥijr 37--38َ ل ِإ نيِرَظْنُ ملا َنِم
َكَ ّن ِإ ِمْوَ يٰى ٱلْوَقْت ِموُ لْعَمْلٱ ِ You have been placed among those who
have been granted respite until the day of destiny. 1.1.5 110--111 15
Ḥijr 39بَر َلاَ ق يِنَ تْيَوْغَأ اَ مِب ِّ َ نِّيَزُأَل ُ هَ ل َ ّن مْ فِي الْأَرْضِ ُ ه َ ّنَ
يِوْغُأَلَو مْ أَجْم َ عِينَ He said: My Lord, because you caused me to stray, I
shall place temptations before them on earth and lead them all astray.
1.190.2 440--441 16 Naḥl 77َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌTruly,
God is powerful over all things. 1.190.12 458--459 16 Naḥl 97ُ نَ لَ ف َ
بِّيَطًةاَ يَحُهَ ّنَ يِيْح ةًwe shall grant him a good life. 3.214 742--743 16 Naḥl
125ٱلْحِكْم َ ةِوَٱلْمَوْعِظَةِwisdom and counsel 1.92 246--247 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 976 index
of qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name
Verse number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 16
Naḥl 90ِلْدَعْلٱِب ُرُم ْأَيَ هَ ّللٱ َ ّن ِإ وَٱلإحْسَانِ God commands justice and
goodness 3.216 742--743 16 Naḥl 128اوَقَ ّتٱ َنيِذَ ّ لا َعَمَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ ُ
نِسْحُم ْمُه َنيِذَ ّ لاَو ونَ God is with those who are pious and do good.
1.191 460--461 17 Isrāʾ 9ُمَوْقَأَيِه يِتَ ّلِ لthe path that is straight- est
1.145.3 332--333 17 Isrāʾ 61ٱس ْ ج ُ دُواْلِآدَمَف َ ا َ ّل ِإ اْوُدَجَس سْيِ لْب ِإ
َ prostrate before Adam, and they all prostrated except Iblīs 1.1.5
110--111 18 Kahf 7ُ ه ُ ّيَأ ً لَ مَع ُنَسْحَأ ْم اwho among them per- forms
the best deeds 1.142.1 328--329 18 Kahf 45ِءاَم َ ّسلٱ َنِمُهاَ نْلَزْنَأٍءآَ مَك ف
َ َ لَ تْخٱ ط َ ب ِ هِنَبَات ُ ٱلأَرْضِ ف َ أَصْب َ حَ هَشِيما ًت َ ذْرُوهُ ٱلرِّياحُ وَ َ لَ
عُ هّٰللٱ َناَك ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ َ تْق ُ ّمٍءْي دِرا ً like water that we sent down
from the sky: the earth's vegetation drew from it, then became dry
straw, and was scattered by the winds. God has power over all things
1.108.1 268--269 20 Ṭāhā 16, 116ٱس ْ ج ُ دُواْلِآدَمَف َ ا َ ّل ِإ اْوُدَجَس سْيِ
لْب ِإ َ prostrate before Adam, and they all prostrated except Iblīs
1.1.5 110--111 20 Ṭāhā 61خَاب ٰىَرَ تْفٱ ِنَم َthose who lie will fail 1.16
132--133 20 Ṭāhā 132وَأْمُرْ أَهْل َ كَ بِالص َ ل َ ّ اةِ اَ هْيَ لَ ع ْرِبَطْصٱَو
command your family to pray, and adhere to it yourself 1.197 476--477 21
Anbiyāʾ 26--27ب َ َ رْك ُ ّمٌداَ بِع ْل مُون لَا ي َ سْبِقُون َ هُبِالْقَوْلِ وَهُم بِأَمْرِهِ
ي َ نوُ لَمْع Rather, they are his hon- ored servants, they speak when he
has spoken, and act on his command. 1.88.6 232--233 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs 977 (cont.) Surah number Surah name
Verse number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 21
Anbiyāʾ 101َ بَس َنيِذَ ّ لٱ قَت ُ هَ ل ْ مْ ٱلْح ُ سْن َ ىthose for whom
blessings have been decreed 1.50 172--173 21 Anbiyāʾ 104َ ب اَ مَك ُهُديِعُ ّن
ٍقْلَخ َل َ ّوَأ آَنْأَد َنيِ لِعاَ ف اَ ّ نُك اَ ّن ِإ آَ نْيَ لَ عً ادْعَو As I brought
the first cre- ation into being, so I shall bring it forth anew---this
is my pledge, and I shall bring it to pass. 1.108.3 282--283 22 Ḥajj 11ِ
لَٰذَةَرِخآْلٱَو اَيْن ُ ّدلٱَرِسَخ كَ نيِبُ مْلٱ ُناَرْسُ خْلٱَوُه having lost this world and
the hereafter---that is the most catastrophic loss! 3.327 784--785 22
Ḥajj 25سَوَاءًالْعَاكِف ِداَ بْلاَوِهيِف ُits resident and the for- eigner are
equal 2.67 664--665 22 Ḥajj 64ُدْيِ مَ حْلا ُ ّيِنَغْلاَوُهHe is rich and praised
1.181.3 416--417 23 Muʾminūn 12مِن سُل َ نيِط نِّمٍةَ لاan extraction of clay
1.161.2 370--371 23 Muʾminūn 30ِ لٰذ يِف َ ّن ِإ كَ لآيَات اَ ّ نُك ن ِإَو ٍ نيِ
لَ تْبُ مَ ل Truly there are signs in that, truly we shall put you to the
test. 1.100.3 260--261 23 Muʾminūn 55أَيَحْسَب ُ ِ مُ ن اَ مَ ّنَأ َنو ِ ب مُه ُ
ّد هِمِن ُ ن َنيِ نَبَو ٍلا َ ّم ُ هَ لُعِراَس مْ فِي تاَرْيَ ـخْلا ِ ب َ لْ لَا ي َ شْعُر
ُ وْنَ Do they think we sup- ply them with wealth and sons in order to
increase their comforts? No indeed, they have no idea! 1.190.4 444--445
24 Nūr 22َ ي نَأ َنوُ ّبِحُت اَلَأ َ ـلُ هَ ّللاَ رِفْغ كُمْDo you not wish that God
should forgive you? 2.23 552--553 24 Nūr 37ِ هيِهْلُ ت ا َ ّل ٌلاَجِر مْ ت ٌةَراَ
ج ِ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَن ذِ ِماَ ق ِإَوِهّٰللاِرْك الص َ ل َ ّ ِةاَكَ ّزلاِءاَتي ِإَوِةا men
whom neither trade nor commerce divert from remembering God, from
performing the prayer, or submitting the alms-levy 1.197 1.219 476--477,
506--507 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 978 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 24 Nūr 40فِيْ
بَحْرٍ لُج ِّيٍّupon the deep ocean 3.354.2 796--797 24 Nūr 45َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ
ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌTruly, God is powerful over all things. 1.190.12
458--459 26 Shuʿarāʾ 97--98َ ل اَ ّ نُك ن ِإِهّٰللٱَت فِي ضَل َ الٍ ُ ن ْذ ِإ نيِب
ُ ّم بَرِ ب ْمُكيِّوَس ِّ َنيِ مَ لاَعْلٱ By God, we were clearly misguided when we
equated you with the Lord of the worlds! 1.88.3 230--231 26 Shuʿarāʾ
157ف َ عَقَر ُ وهَا ف َ أَصْب َ حُوا نَادِمِينَThey slaughtered the mare, and in
the morn- ing, they had cause to regret. 1.199 478--479 28 Qaṣaṣ 5ُ مَ ّن
نَأُديِرُ نَو َ لَ ع َ ّن َنيِذَ ّ لٱ ى ٱسْت ُ ض ْ عِفُواْفِي ٱلأَرْضِ وَنَجْعَل َ َ لَعْجَنَوًةَ
ّمِئَأ ْمُه هُمُ َنيِ ثِراَوْلٱ We intend to bless those rendered weak on earth
with abundant favors. We shall make them Imams. We shall make them
inherit. 3.193 738--739 28 Qaṣaṣ 24رَب تْلَزنَأ اَ مِ ل يِّ ن ِإ ِّ َ ل ِإ َ ْنِم
َ ّي خَيْرٍ ف َ قِيرٌ My Lord, I am in dire need of whatever you may bestow!
1.158.3 362--363 28 Qaṣaṣ 83ُ لَعْجَنُةَرِخآلٱُرا َ ّدلٱ َكْلِ ت هَا اً ّوُ لُ ع
َنوُديِرُ ي اَل َنيِذَ ّلِ ل فِي ٱلأَرْضِ وَلَا ف َ سَادًا وَٱلْعَاقِب َ َنيِقَ ّتُ مْلِ لُة We
shall reserve the here- after for those who do not seek to exalt them-
selves on the earth or spread corruption. The good end is for the god-
fearing 1.3.4 120--121 29 ʿAnkabūt 1--2الٓمٓ أَحَسِب ساَ ّنلا َ ُ أَن َرْتُ ي كُوا
أَن ي َ ْمُهَو اَ ّنَمآ اوُ لوُق لَا ي ُ ُ نَ تْف ونَ Alif Lām Mīm. Do people think
they can claim, "we believe," without being tested? 1.154.4 354--355 29
ʿAnkabūt 20َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌTruly, God is powerful
over all things. 1.190.12 458--459 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 979 (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 31 Luqmān 34َ
عا َ ّسلاُمْلِعُهَدنِعَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ ةِ ثْيَغْلا ُلِّزَ نُ يَو َ وَي َ عْلَمُمَا فِي الْأَرْحَامِ
وَمَا ت َ دْرِي ن َ فْس َ ت اَذا َ ّم ٌ كْسِب ُ غ َ دًا وَمَا ت َ دْرِي ن َ فْس ٌ بِأَي
ِّ أَرْضٍ توُ مَ ت ِ لَ عَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ ُ يم ٌخَبِيرٌ God has knowledge of the
coming hour, he sends down rain, and knows what is in wombs. No man
knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no man knows the land in which he
will die, but God is all-knowing, all- aware. 1.126 308--309 33 Aḥzāb 6َ
ب ِماَحْرَأْلا وُ لوُأَو عْضُهُمْ أَوْل َ ىٰ باَ تِك يِف ٍضْعَبِ ب ِهَ ّللا ِ Those who are
from the same womb have more claim upon each other according to God's
Book. 2.28.2 566--567 33 Aḥzāb 72ُهَ ّن ِإ ُناَسن ِإْلا اًموُ لَظ َناَك جَهُوْلًا
the human, for he was a tyrant, an ignoramus. 1.197 476--477 34 Sabaʾ
13ُروُك َ ّشلا يِداَ بِع ْنِم ٌليِ لَ قَوfew among my servants are truly grateful
1.189 436--437 34 Sabaʾ 35اًداَلْوَأَو اًلاَوْمَأُرَ ثْكَأ ُنْحَن وَمَا نَحْنُ بِم ُ َنيِ ب َ
ّذَع We have more wealth and more children; we shall never have to endure
suffering. 1.190.7 450--451 35 Fāṭir 1أُولِي أَجْنِحَةٍwith sets of wings
1.88.6 232--233 35 Fāṭir 1َ لَ عَ هللا َ ّن ِإ ى ٰ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌTruly,
God is powerful over all things. 1.190.12 458--459 35 Fāṭir 3َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ
نَأف كُونَHow are you deluded? 1.80.13 1.84.2 1.105.2 212--213, 220--221,
270--271 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 980 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 35 Fāṭir 8َ لَ
ف ا ت َ ذْهَب ْ ن َ ِ هْيَ لَ ع َكُسْف مْ حَس َ رَات ِ لَ عَ هّٰللا َ ّن ِإ ٍ اَ مِبٌ مي
ي َ ص ْ ن َ عُونَ Do not grieve over their actions, for God knows all that
they do! 1.160 368--369 35 Fāṭir 14ُ ئِّبَ نُ ي اَلَو كَ مِثْلُ خَبِيرٍNo one informs
you as well as one who is fully aware 1.151.2 346--347 38 Ṣād 3وَلَات ٍصاَ
نَم َنيِح َand it is too late to escape! 1.189 2.41 438--439, 606--607 38
Ṣād 27وَٱلْأَرْض ُ هَنْيَ ب اَمَو َ مَا بَاطِل ً ا ذَٰل ِ ُ رَفَك َنيِذَ ّ لٱ ُ ّنَظ َك وْا
ف َ ُ رَفَك َنيِذَ ّلِّل ٌلْيَو ِراَ ّنلٱ َنِم اْو and the earth in vain. That is
the claim of those who do not believe--- woe and hellfire to
unbelievers! 3.70 394--395 38 Ṣād 71--74ِ لاَخ يِّ ن ِإ َ شَ ب ٌق رًا مِّن طِينٍ ُ
تْي َ ّوَس اَذِإَ ف هُوَن َ فَخْت ُ َ ف يِحو ُ ّر نِمِهيِف ُ هَ ل اوُعَق سَاجِدِينَ ف َ
سَجَدَالْمَل َ ائ ِ كَةُ َ مْجَأ ْمُهُ ّلُك سيِ لْب ِإ ا َ ّل ِإ َنوُع َ I shall create
a human out of clay; when I have fashioned him in good proportion and
breathed into him my spirit, bow before him in prostration. The angels
prostrated, every one of them, except Iblīs 1.190.1 440--441 38 Ṣād
80--81َ ل ِإ نيِرَظْنُ ملا َنِم َكَ ّن ِإ ِمْوَ يٰى ٱلْوَقْت ِموُ لْعَمْلٱ ِ You have
been placed among those who have been granted respite until the day of
destiny 1.1.5 110--111 38 Ṣād 88َ تَ لَو ُ مَ لْع َ بُهَأَبَن َ ّن عْدَحِينٍYou shall
surely learn the truth of its report, but only after a while. 1.68
192--193 39 Zumar 21ضْرَأْلا يِف َعيِ باَنَيflow out in streams 1.164.2
380--381 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 981 (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 39 Zumar 73ُ
ه َ ّبَر اْوَقَ ّتا َنيذلا َقيِسَو َ ل ِإ ْم ى اًرَمُزِةَ ّنَ جْلا Those who were
con- scious of their Lord will be led in groups into par- adise 1.188
434--435 40 Ghāfir 60ٱدْعُونِيْ أَسْت َ جِب ْ لـ َ كُمْPray to me and I will
answer. 3.124 718--719 40 Ghāfir 62َ فْؤُ تٰىَ ّ نَأف كُونَHow are you deluded?
1.80.13 1.84.2 1.105.2 212--213, 220--221, 270--271 40 Ghāfir 78ِ لاَ
نُهَرِسَخَو َنوُ لِطْبُ مْلا َكThere shall the falsifiers lose everything. 2.3
534--535 41 Fuṣṣilat 15ًةَ ّوُ ق اَ ّنِم ُ ّدَشَأ ْنَمْاوُ لاَ قwho said: is anyone
mightier than we are? 1.108.3 280--281 41 Fuṣṣilat 30ُ هّٰللا اَنُ ّبَر اوُ لاَ
ق َنيذلا َ ّن ِإ َ تْسا َ ّمُث ِ هْيَ لَ ع ُل َ ّزَ نَتَت اوُماَق مُ الْمَل َ ائ ِ
اَلَو اوُ فاَ خَت ا َ ّلَأُةَك يتلاِةَ ّنَ جْلاِب اوُرِشْبَأَو اوُ نَ زْحَت َ عوُ تْمُتنُك دُونَ As
for those who pro- claim that Our Lord is God, and then remain upright,
angels come to them, saying, do not fear and do not grieve, but rejoice,
for paradise, as promised, is yours! 1.174.4 396--397 44 Dukhān 29َ ب اَ مَ
ف كَت ِ هْيَ لَ ع ْ ُءاَم َ ّسلاُم وَالْأَرْض اوُ ناَك اَمَو ُ مُنظَرِينَ Then, neither
the sky nor the earth weeps over them, and they are not granted a
reprieve. 1.189 438--439 47 Muḥam- mad 7ْمُكْرُصنَيَ هللا اوُرُصنَت ْن ِإ تِّبَ ثُ يَو
ْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ If you help God, he will help you and give you a firm
foothold. 1.181.3 416--417 47 Muḥam- mad 35ْمُكَعَمُ هّٰللٱَو َنْوَ لْعَألٱُ مُتنَأَو وَل
َ َ ـلاَ مْعَأ ْمُكَرِتَ ي ن كُمْ You shall overcome. God is with you, and he
will not let your deeds go to waste 1.63 188--189 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 982 index
of qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name
Verse number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 48
Fatḥ 7جُن ُ تاَواَم َ ّسلاُدو ِ وَالْأَرْضِ the legions of the skies and the
earth 1.181.3 416--417 48 Fatḥ 26وَ َ لْهَأَو اَ هِب َ ّقَحَأ اوُ ناَك هَاand they
were worthy of it and deserving 1.188 434--435 50 Qāf 21َ ن ُ ّلُك ِ ئآَس
اَهَع َ ّم ٍسْف قٌ وَش َ هِيدٌ Each soul is accompa- nied by its driver and its
witness 1.82.2 214--217 57 Ḥadīd 11مَن ذَا الذي ي ُ قْرِض ُ الله َ ق َ ُ يَ ف
اً نَسَح اًضْر ُ هَ لُهَفِعاَض ٌ ميِرَكٌرْجَأُ هَ لَو Who will offer God a beautiful loan
of deeds, that he may multiply it for him, and give him a generous
recompense? 1.181.3 416--417 57 Ḥadīd 21ذَٰل ِ كَ ف َ ض نَمِهيِ تْؤُ يِهللا ُل ْ
ي َ شَاءُالله ُذُو الْفَض ْ لِ الْعَظِيم That is God's bounty, which he bestows
on whom he wills---great is God's bounty! 1.181.3 416--417 57 Ḥadīd 23ل
ِّ َ لْ يَك َ لَ عْاْوَس ْأَت ا ى ٰ َ تاَ ف اَم كُمْ وَلَا ت َ فْر َ حُواْبِم َ آ آتَىٰكُمْ Do
not weep over what you have lost, and do not exult over what you have
gained. 3.409 812--813 58 Mujādalah 19بْزِح َكِئَٰ لوُأ اَلَأ ِناَطْي َ ّشلا ُ بْزِح
َ ّن ِإ ُمُه ِناَطْي َ ّشلا َ ِ ساَ خْلا رُونَ These are Satan's faction. Hark!
Satan's faction are losers. 1.192 466--467 61 Ṣaff 3َ ت نَأِهّٰللاَدنِع اً تْقَمَرُ
بَك اوُ لوُق مَا لَا ت َ َنوُ لَعْف God deems it a great out- rage when you say
what you do not do. 2.53.21 644--645 62 Jumʿah 4ذَٰل ِ كَ ف َ ض نَمِهيِ تْؤُ
يِهللا ُل ْ ي َ شَاءُالله ُذُو الْفَض ْ لِ الْعَظِيم That is God's bounty, which
he bestows on whom he wills---great is God's bounty! 1.181.3 416--417
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 983 (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 63 Munāfiqūn
7خَزَائ ِ تاَواَم َ ّسلا ُن ِ وَالْأَرْضِ the treasures of the skies and the
earth 1.181.3 416--417 65 Ṭalāq 2َ رْخَمُ هَ ل ْلَعْجَيَ هللا ِقَ ّتَي ْنَم جًاGod
shows the God- conscious a way out 1.181.3 414--415 65 Ṭalāq 3جَعَلَ الله
ُل ِ كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دْرًاGod has appointed for each thing a measure 1.181.1
66 Taḥrīm 8َ لَ ع َكَ ّن ِإ ى كُلِّ ش َ يْءٍق َ دِيرٌYou are powerful over all
things 1.88, 1.222 242--243, 514--515 71 Nūḥ 10--12ٱسْت َ غْفِر ُ ُهَ ّن ِإ
ْمُكَ ّبَر او كَانَ ْمُكْيَ لَ عَءاَم َ ّسلا ِلِسْرُ ي اًرا َ ّفَغ ٍلاَوْمَأِب ْمُكْدِدْمُ يَو
اًراَرْدِم َنيِ نَبَو Ask your Lord for for- giveness, for he is ever
forgiving---he will make the sky pour rain and provide you with wealth
and children. 1.141.1 326--327 74 Mud- daththir 38َ ن ُ ّلُك َ بَسَك اَ مِب
ٍسْف ت ْ رَهِين َ ةٌ Every soul is mortgaged to what it has earned 3.327
784--785 74 Mud- daththir 42--43مَا سَلـ َ َ ل اوُ لاَ قَ رَقَس يِف ْمُكَك مْ ن َ كُ
مِنَ الْم ُ َنيِّلَص What led you into the Fire? and they answered, We were
not among those who prayed 1.197 476--477 77 Mursalāt 21--22فِي ق َ َ ل
ِإ نيِك َ ّم ٍراَ ر ىٰق َ دَرٍ موُ لْع َ ّم a safe abode for a known term
1.161.2 370--371 79 Nāziʿāt 26ِ لٰذ يِف َ ّن ِإ َ مِ لًةَرْبِعَ ل َك نْ يَخْش َ
ىThere is a lesson here for all who venerate God. 1.209 490--491 81
Takwīr 26ف َ أي ْ نَ ت َ ذْهَب ُ ونSo where do you go? 1.84.2 220--221 82
Infiṭār 6َك َ ّرَغ اَم ُناَسن ِإْلا اَ ه ُ ّيَأ اَي ِميِرَكْـلا َكِّ بَرِ ب O human,
what has deceived you into neglecting your Gener- ous Lord? 1.220
408--409 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 984 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah number Surah name Verse
number Verse text Verse translation Text number Page number 102 Takāthur
1--2ىَ ّتَحُرُ ثاَكَ ّتلاُمُكاَ هْلَأ ٰ زُرْتُم ُ َرِ باَقَمْلا You are obsessed with
gathering more and more until you visit your graves 1.218 500--501
Qurʾan (references and modified quotes) Surah Number Surah Name Verse
Number Text Number Page Number 2 Baqarah 24 1.181.3 417 2 Baqarah 35
1.88.9 239 2 Baqarah 88 2.64 661 2 Baqarah 125 1.190.5 449 2 Baqarah 143
1.125 307 2 Baqarah 156 1.27 147 2 Baqarah 163 2.31.9 581 2 Baqarah 189
1.152.2 349 2 Baqarah 224 2.69 667 2 Baqarah 231 3.212 743 2 Baqarah 237
3.435 821 2 Baqarah 255 1.158.1 361 2 Baqarah 264 2.53.21 645 2 Baqarah
265 1.131.1 315 3 Āl ʿImrān 19 1.196.2 473 3 Āl ʿImrān 26 1.88.11 243 3
Āl ʿImrān 103 2.31.3 575 3 Āl ʿImrān 134 2.69 667 3 Āl ʿImrān 139
1.164.3 381 3 Āl ʿImrān 169 1.84.2 221 3 Āl ʿImrān 173 1.181.3 419 4
Nisāʾ 60 3.406 813 4 Nisāʾ 69 1.181.3 417 4 Nisāʾ 97 1.187 433 4 Nisāʾ
88 2.45.4, 2.58 615, 653 4 Nisāʾ 110 3.406 719 4 Nisāʾ 164 1.180.3 409 5
Māʾidah 3 1.83.3, 1.196.2 217, 473 5 Māʾidah 19 1.149.1 341 5 Māʾidah
27--31 1.190.2 443 6 Anʿām 57 1.94.3 251 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of
qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs 985 (cont.) Surah Number Surah Name
Verse Number Text Number Page Number 6 Anʿām 160 3.296 775 7 Aʿrāf 17
2.44 609 7 Aʿrāf 26 1.27 147 7 Aʿrāf 46--49 1.150.2 347 7 Aʿrāf 130
1.141.2 327 7 Aʿrāf 155 1.141.2 327 7 Aʿrāf 157 1.151.2 347 8 Anfāl 12
1.190.2 443 9 Tawbah 10--12 3.141 727 9 Tawbah 40 3.354.1 795 9 Tawbah
52 1.23 133 9 Tawbah 59 2.53.24 647 9 Tawbah 60 2.26.2 559 11 Hūd 70 1.4
125 12 Yūsuf 53 1.84.1, 1.174.1 219, 395 13 Raʿd 12 1.183.4 423 14
Ibrāhīm 7 1.155, 3.406 355, 813 14 Ibrāhīm 37 1.190.5 449 15 Ḥijr 17--18
1.88.6 233 15 Ḥijr 88 1.190.4 445 15 Ḥijr 94 1.228 521 16 Naḥl 51 2.31.9
581 16 Naḥl 89 1.83.3 217 17 Isrāʾ 12 1.88.5 233 17 Isrāʾ 24 2.46 617 17
Isrāʾ 34 2.74 673 17 Isrāʾ 64 1.190.2 441 18 Kahf 45 1.17 135 19 Maryam
50 1.23 141 20 Ṭāhā 39 1.196.2 473 20 Ṭāhā 67 1.4 125 21 Anbiyāʾ 102
1.181.3 415 22 Ḥajj 18 1.131.1 315 22 Ḥajj 36 2.53.14 639 23 Muʾminūn 77
3.350 793 23 Muʾminūn 99--100 1.181.3 417 23 Muʾminūn 115 1.61.1,
1.83.3, 3.351 185, 217, 793 24 Nūr 24 1.197 477 25 Furqān 27 3.170 731
25 Furqān 38 1.180.4 411 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 986 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Surah Number Surah Name Verse
Number Text Number Page Number 26 Shuʿarāʾ 84 1.23 141 28 Qaṣaṣ 4
1.190.4 445 29 ʿAnkabūt 41 1.17 133 30 Rūm 12 3.350 793 32 Sajdah 12
2.41 607 33 Aḥzāb 45 1.102.1 263 33 Aḥzāb 58 1.72 199 33 Aḥzāb 67
1.190.3 445 34 Sabaʾ 15--16 1.164.2 381 34 Sabaʾ 52 1.218.1 503 35 Fāṭir
10 1.180.2 409 35 Fāṭir 28 3.133 721 35 Fāṭir 35 1.181.3 407 36 Yāsīn 12
1.23 139 36 Yāsīn 80 1.131.1 315 37 Ṣāffāt 6 1.88.6 233 42 Shūrā 20 1.23
141 42 Shūrā 23 1.148.3 339 42 Shūrā 28 1.112 289 43 Zukhruf 13 1.46 171
44 Dukhān 10 1.88.5 233 45 Jāthiyah 9 3.212 743 48 Fatḥ 6 2.58 653 49
Ḥujurāt 12 1.72 199 49 Ḥujurāt 17 1.154.4 355 50 Qāf 12 1.180.4 411 50
Qāf 23 1.181.3 417 55 Raḥmān 41 1.158.1 361 56 Wāqiʿah 28 1.102.1 263 56
Wāqiʿah 93--94 1.80.12 213 62 Jumʿah 6--7 2.69 667 62 Jumʿah 8 1.147 337
64 Taghābun 15 3.277 773 66 Taḥrīm 8 1.69, 1.88.11 195, 243 67 Mulk 22
2.45.4 615 68 Qalam 42 1.149.3 343 73 Muzzammil 11 2.28.2 567 75 Qiyāmah
36 1.61.1, 1.83.3, 3.351 185, 217, 793 78 Nabaʾ 18 1.193 469 81 Takwīr 4
1.193 469 81 Takwīr 8 1.190.10 453 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 987 (cont.) Surah Number Surah Name Verse
Number Text Number Page Number 82 Infiṭār 4 1.223 517 82 Infiṭār 10--11
1.181.3 415 83 Muṭaffifūn 14 2.10, 2.58 541, 653 85 Burūj 1 1.87 225 93
Ḍuḥā 11 2.28.2, 2.69 565, 667 111 Masad 4 2.28.2 567 112 Ikhlāṣ 1 2.31.9
581 112 Ikhlāṣ 3 1.180.2, 1.184.2 409 Hadith (direct quotes) Text
Translation Text number Page number إنّه يموت من مات منّا وليس بميّت ويبلى
من بلي منّا وليس ببالٍ. When one of us dies, he is not dead. When his body
disintegrates in the ground, it has not disintegrated. 1.84.2 220--221
إنّ الله يحب ّ العبد ويبغض عمله ويحب ّ العمل ويبغض ب َ دَنه. God can love
a servant and yet hate his deeds or love his deeds and yet hate his
being. 1.152.2 348--349 إنّ أمّتي سيفتنون من بعدي ... إنّ القوم سيفتنون
بأموالهم ويمنّون بدينهم على ربّهم ويتمنّون رحمته ويأمنون سطوته ويستحلّون
حرامه بالشبهات الكاذبة والأهواء الساهية فيستحلّون الخمر بالنبيذ والسحت
بالهديّة والربا بالبيع. My community will be thrown into tur- moil when I
die. ... people will be tested with regard to wealth---thinking their
sup- port of Islam a favor to their Lord, they will feel entitled to his
mercy and believe themselves secure against his punishment. By raising
false suspicions and wayward passions, they will legalize the things he
has forbidden---they will drink wine, calling it date juice, take
bribes, calling it gift-giving, and practice usury, calling it trade.
1.154.4 354--355 غيّبيه عنّي فإن ّ ي إذا نظرت إليه ذ كرت الدنيا وزخارفها.
Remove it from my sight---it reminds me of the world and its ornaments!
1.158.4 362--363 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 988 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Text Translation Text number Page
number يؤتى يوم القيامة بالإمام الجائر وليس معه نصير ولا عاذر فيلقى في
جهنّم فيدور فيها كما تدور الرحى ثمّيرتبط في قعرها. On the day of
resurrection, the unjust leader will be brought for judgment, and he
will not have a single person to help him or speak on his behalf. He
will be thrown into the Pit of Gehenna and spin there like a millstone,
then he will be teth- ered in its lowest point. 1.162.2 372--373 إنّ
الجنّة حُجبت بالمكاره وإنّ النار حُفّت بالشهوات. Paradise is veiled by
torments, while the Fire is surrounded by delights. 1.174.1 394--395 لا
يستقيم إيمان عبد حتّى يستقيم قلبه ولا يستقيم قلبه حتّى يستقيم لسانه. A
person's belief is right only when his heart is right, and his heart is
right only when his tongue is righteous. 1.174.5 398--399 يا ٱبن آدم
ٱعمل الخـير ودَع الشرّفإذا أنت جوادٌقاصد. Son of Adam, do good and avoid
evil, and you will race ahead like a thoroughbred. 1.174.7 398--399 هذا
الشيطان قد أيس من عبادته إنّك تسمع ما أسمع وترى ما أرى إلّا أنّك لست بنبيّ
وإنّك لوزير وإنّك لعلى خير. This is Satan, who now despairs of being
worshipped. You see what I see and hear what I hear, ʿAlī, though you
are not a prophet, but my vizier, and on the path of virtue. 1.190.12
458--459 َ بَ تَ يْلَ ف اًدّمعتم ّيلع بذك نم هدعقم ْأَ ّو من النار. Whoever
deliberately misattributes some- thing to me will take possession of a
seat in hellfire. 1.208 486--487 إن ّ الو اً نمؤم يتّمأ ىلع فاخأ ال ي
مشركًا أمّا المؤمن فيمنعه الله بإيمانه وأمّا المشرك فيقمعه الله بشر كه
ولـكنّي ملاع نانَ جلا قفانم ّلك مكيلع فاخأ اللسان يقول ما تعرفون ويفعل ما
تنكرون. I do not fear harm for my community from either believer or
unbeliever. As for the believer, God holds him back because of his
belief. As for the unbeliever, God thwarts him because of his unbelief.
I fear harm for you from every man whose heart harbors hypocrisy while
his tongue spouts knowledge, who says what you know to be good, but does
what you know is evil. 2.27.5 562--563 صلاح ذات البين أفضل من عامّة
الصلاة والصيام. To reconcile with kin is even better than to pray and to
fast. 2.47.1 616--617 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 989 (cont.) Text Translation Text number
Page number لن ت ُ اهيف فيعضلل ذخؤي ال ةّمأ س َ ّدق حقّه من القوي ّ غير
متعتع. A nation in which the weak are not given justice against the
strong except by anx- iously stammering will never be made holy. 2.53.14
640--641 صَلِّ بهم كصلاة أضعفهم وكن بالمؤمنين رحيمًا. Pray the prayer of the
weakest among them---show compassion to all believers. 2.53.16 640--641
.دوهيلاب اوهّبشت الو بي َ ّشلا اورِّيَ غDye your white hair and don't
emulate the Jews. 3.13 682--683 لا يبغضك مؤمن ولا يحبّك منافق.No believer
will hate you, and no hypocrite will love you. 3.38 690--691 لا طاعة
لمخلوق في معصئة الخالق.Do not obey humans if it means you will disobey
God. 3.149 726--727 الآنَ حَمِيَ الوَطِيس.Now the furnace burns. 3.253
748--759 Hadith (references) Text Translation Text number Page number
الإمامة في القريش.The Imamate is vested in Quraysh. 142.1 329 أنا مدينة
العلم وعليّ بابها.I am the city of knowledge and ʿAlī is its gateway.
1.152.2 349 ستقاتل بعدي الناكثين والقاسطين والمارقين You will battle the
pledge-breakers, the wrongdoers, and the faith-leavers after me.
1.190.11 457 لا طاعة لمخلوق في معصية الخالق.Do not obey humans if it
means you will disobey God. 2.33 598 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 990 index
of qurʾan, hadith, poetry, and proverbs Poetry (direct quotes) Text
Translation Poet Text number Page number ِ لْثِ مِب يــــِنْئِجَف يــــِ ئاَبآ
َكــــِئٰ لوُأ هِــــمْ َ مَج اَذ ِإ ٗعـِماَجَمْلاُ رــــْيِرَج اــــَ ي اــــَ نْتَع These
are my ancestors, Jarīr, bring on yours! Who will be your boast in our
gatherings? Farazdaq 0.4 100--101 اـــَهِروُک یـــٰلَ ع يـــِمْوَ ي اـــَم َناـــَ
ّتَش رـــــِ باَج يـــــِخَأ ٍناـــــَ ّيَحُمْوـــــَ يَو O how different my days
today, always in the saddle, and the days spent in the com- pany of
Jābir's brother, Ḥayyān! Aʿshā 1.3.2 118--119 ُ رــْمَع اــَ ي ِرــْيَ خْلا
َكــيِ بَأُ رــْمَعَ ل ْيــِ نَ ّن ِإ و نـــِم ٍرـــَضَو ىـــٰلَ ع ٖليِ لَ قِءاـــَ ن
ِإْلا اَذ ْ By the life of your virtuous father, I swear My pot has
nothing but smudges of fat. anonymous 1.25 142--143 تْوـــَعَدْوـــَ ل َكـــِ
لاَ نُه ْمـــُ هْنِمَكاـــَ تَأ َ ِ مَ حْلاِةــــــَ يِمْرَأ ُلــــــْثِم ٌلاــــــَجِر يمٖ
When you call out Their men rush to you Like the hot summer cloud Abū
Jundub al-Hudhalī al- Mashʾūm 1.25 144--145 َ رــــَعْنُ مِب يِرــــْمَأ
ٗمُکُتْرَمَأ جِ اللِّ وٰــــی َ ت ْمــَ لَ ف صُ ّنلا اوــُ نيِبَ تْس ـَ حُض ا َ ّل ِإ َحــ
ْ ـی الْغَدٖ I gave you my considered opin- ion At the place of the winding
sands But you heeded not my counsel Till forenoon the next day. Durayd
ibn al- Ṣimmah 1.35 160--161 ًةــــَخانُم ا َ ّل ِإ ُ ّكــــَفْنَت اــــَمُ
رــــيِ باَدَح َ لَ ع ى الْخ َ سْـ ـف ـِمْرَ ن ْوَأ ِ ـَ هِب يـ ـَ لَ ب اـ ـدًا ق َ فْـ
اَ رـ Emaciated camels fodderless in the night when they kneel down to
rest, or ridden hard into the desert wastes. Dhū al- Rummah 1.112
290--291 عِنْــدَالص ىٰرــ ُ ّسلاُمْوــَقلاُدــَ مْحُي ِحاــَ ب َ ّWhen morning
comes, the night- traveler will be praised. Jumayḥibn al-Sharīd al-
Taghlibī 1.158.4 364--365 ِ تاَ رَجَح ْيــِف َحــْيِص اــً بْهَن َكــْنَع ْعَدَو
هٖforget about the looting that caused screams in the neighbor- hood
Imruʾ al-Qays 1.160 368--369 اــَهُراَ ع َكــْنَعٌ رــِهاَظٌةاــَكَش َكــْلِ تَوthat
is a disease whose shame is external to you Abū Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī
2.28.3 568--569 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 991 (cont.) Text Translation Poet Text
number Page number َ ي ْدـــــَ قَو سْت َ َ نَ تُ مْلاَةـــــَ ّنِّظلاُدـــــْيِف ص
ِّحٗSometimes, the only benefit a well-wisher derives is suspicion
anonymous 2.28.4 570--571 ثـــِّبَ ل ً لْيِ لَ ق ْ لـــَ مَح اـــَجْيَ هْلا ِقـــَحْلَ
ي اWait just a little Ḥamal will soon join the fray! Ḥamal ibn Badr
2.28.5 570--571 َ ت ْنِإــَ ف فــْيَك يــِنيِ لَأْس َ أَنْــت يــِ نَ ّنِإَ ف َ بــْيَر
ىــٰلَ عٌروــُ بَص بيِ لَص ِناــَمَ ّزلا ِ ٗ ي َ ٌةــــَ بآَك يــــِ ب ىٰرُ ت ْنَأ َ
ّيــــَ لَ ع ُ ّزــــِع َ يَ ف شْمَــــت َ عَــــادٍ أَوْ ي ُ سَــــاءُحَبِيب ٗ If you
asked, "How do you fare?" I would answer: I am patient and I am strong
in the face of fate's attacks. I do not allow myself to show distress,
Lest my enemy gloat, and my friend grieve. ʿAbbās ibn Mir- dās al-Sulamī
2.36 600--601 تــــيِبَ ت ْنَأًءاَد َكــــُ بْسَحَو ِ بِ ب َ ٍةــــَ نْط ّٖدِقْلا ىـــَ
ل ِإ ُ ّنـــِحَتٌداـــَ بْكَأ َكـــَ لْوَحَو How sick you are! You sleep with a
full belly Surrounded by hearts yearning for a mouthful of dry hide.
Ḥātim al-Ṭāʾī 2.45.3 612--613 مُسْت َ ـيِ لِبْق ـَ يِر َنـ ـاحَ الص ـْي َ ّ ـف ِ
ت َ ـُ هُبِرْض ـمْ ب بــــِصاَ ح ِ ٍ بَيْــــنَ أَغْــــوَارٍ وَجُلْم ُ ودٖ They advance
into the burning winds of high summer As they enter the lowlands it
blows dust, and pebbles, and rocks in their faces. Bishr ibn Abī Khāzim
al- Asadī 2.64 660--661 تْنُك ْنِإَ ف َ ـلَم ىٰرو ُ ّشلاِب َ كْت َ أُمُورَهُــمْ ف َ
كَيْــــف َ بِهٰــــذَا وَالم ُ شِيــــر ُ بَ ّيُغ َنو ٗ تْنُك ْن ِإَو َ بِالْقُرْب ٰ ى
حَجَجْت َ خَصِيمَهُـ ـمْ ف َ غَيْـــــر ُ َ رْقَأَو ِّيـــــِبَ ّنلاِب ىـــــٰ لْوَأَك ب ٗ If
you became their ruler through consultation, How is this valid when the
coun- sellors were absent? If you argued against your oppo- nent through
kinship, Then another, closer than you to the Prophet, is worthier! ʿAlī
3.174 732--733 يِذـــَ ّ لا ُنوـــُ ن َ ّظلا ُ ّدـــُ جلا ُلـــَعْجُي اـــَم
جُنِّـــــب َ صَـــــوْب بـــــِج َ ّللا َ ٖرِطاَ ملا ِ اــــمَط اــــَم اَذ ِإ
ِّيــــِ تاَ رُفلا َلــــْثِم ي َ قْــــــــذِف ُ بِالب ُ ٖرِهاَ ملاَو ِّيــــــــِصْو
The dubious well, That the thunder clouds pass by, Is not the surging
Euphrates, Which tosses ship and captain. Aʿshā 3.250 756--757 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 992 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs (cont.) Text Translation Poet Text number
Page number تــــْيَأَر اــــَ ّمَ ل لاَ ف ُ َ لَ ف ْدــــَ ق اــــً جِ جــــاWhen
I saw a successful man who was victorious anonymous 3.252 758--759
Proverbs (direct quotes) Text Translation Text number Page number بعد
اللتيا والتيafter the small calamity and the large one 1.5 125 لو کان
يطاع لقُصيرٍ أمرٌO if only Qaṣīr's command had been obeyed! 1.35 161
متفرّقين أياديَ سَباthey will disperse like the hands of Sabā 1.94.1 249
ناقش الشو كة بالشو كةa person who extracts a thorn with a thorn 1.118
297 حاملُ ضَب ٍّhe carries a spiny-tailed lizard 1.145 335 الرائد لا يكذب
أهلهThe scout does not lie to his people. 1.153.1 349 أخفى من سفاد
الغرابmore hidden than the mating of a crow 1.163.2 377 آخِر الداء
الـكَيّCauterizing is the last resort! 1.166 385 ُ ت الو ةانَ ق مهل زَمغُ ت
ال قر َ ع لهم صَفاةTheir spear became hard, their rock uncrushable.
1.190.10 455 كناقل التمر إلى هَج َ رlike the man who carried dates to
sell in Hajar 2.28.1 563 سْيـَ ل ٌحْدِق َ ّنَح اَ هْنِم َAn arrow has whirred
that does not belong to the quiver! 2.28.1 565 مَنْ مَال َ ت ْ ب ِ ةَ ّيِمَ
ّرلاِهone whose arrows pursued an animal that veered to one side 2.28.2
565 هنم رَذتعُ ي امو كاّيإBeware of an action you must justify! 2.33 597
كلا ولاLike no and no 2.36 599 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 index of qurʾan,
hadith, poetry, and proverbs 993 (cont.) Text Translation Text number
Page number قلب ظهر المجنّTurned the face of his shield 2.41 605 قد جرى
ٱبنا عنانThe two sons of ʿinān have made their run. 3.186 737 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة Index of Religious and Ethical Concepts This index lists a
large selection of ethical and religious concepts from the Arabic text
of Nahj al- Balāghah (only substantives are listed, not verbs, and the
sequence is based on root letters).1 For names, places, and a wider
range of terms, please see the English indexes.2 You can also search the
online version of this volume digitally. إنسان110 ، 132 ، 210 ، 220 ،
476 ، 508 ، 512 ، 522 ، 564 ، 594 ، 680 ، 706 ، 720 ، 734 إنابة366 ، 584
أناة168 ، 206 ، 230 ، 790 ، 816 تأهّب518 أهل بيت )النبيّ(250 ، 436 ، 538 ،
654 آية الله، آيات الله112 ، 114 ، 220 ، 230 ، 232 ، 260 ، 264 ، 408 ،
414 ، 424 ، 462 ، 474 ، 502 ، 742 بدعة، بدع، مبتدعات132 ، 138 ، 220 ،
330 ، 342 ، 346 ، 348 ، 364 ، 372 ، 384 ، 398 ، 412 ، 486 ، 516 ، 536 ،
712 بخل308 ، 628 ، 678 ، 734 ، 744 ، 794 ، 796 بخيل308 ، 312 ، 324 ، 628
، 688 ، 712 ، 744 ، 752 برّ164 ، 166 ، 358 ، 450 ، 742 ، 794 وفاجر164 ،
602 الله. كثير الوقوع إثم، آثام144 ، 178 ، 232 ، 358 ، 442 ، 628 ، 724 ،
782 ، 784 آخرة. كثير الوقوع أدب، آداب410 ، 576 ، 592 ، 678 ، 692 ، 708 ،
790 ، 804 تأديب، مؤدّب158 ، 404 ، 694 ، 788 ألفة، تأّلف236 ، 248 ، 328 ،
380 ، 450 ، 452 ، 454 ، 496 ، 520 ، 628 ، 658 ، 674 ، 692 إمام، أئمّة.
كثير الوقوع أمر. كثير الوقوع أمان358 ، 514 ، 688 ، 700 ، 748 أمانة106 ،
110 ، 146 ، 154 ، 210 ، 232 ، 476 ، 534 ، 558 ، 604 ، 606 ، 634 ، 636 ،
642 ، 670 أمل148 ، 150 ، 166 ، 174 ، 184 ، 202 ، 206 ، 218 ، 286 ، 312 ،
414 ، 464 ، 534 ، 540 ، 682 ، 686 ، 722 ، 742 ، 784 1 From ʿAlī's texts
only, not Raḍī's introduction. 2 For a full print concordance, see
Muḥammadī and Dashtī, al-Muʿjam al-mufahras li-alfāẓ Nahj al-balāghah.
For a thematic index, see Muḥammad, al-Muʿjam al-mawḍūʿī li-Nahj al-
balāghah, and Bayḍūn, Taṣnīf Nahj al-balāghah. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس
المفاهيم الدينيّة والأخلاقيّة995 518 ، 526 ، 582 ، 584 ، 702 ، 718 ، 722 ،
724 ، 728 ، 792 ، 812 ثبات236 ثقة. انظر "و" جبن، جبان628 ، 678 ، 720 ،
744 جحيم212 جِدّ150 ، 312 ، 346 ، 436 ، 438 ، 452 ، 518 ، 574 ، 576 ، 596
، 738 ، 770 جرأة322 ، 508 ، 510 تجربة، تجارب108 ، 230 ، 398 ، 576 ، 588
، 634 ، 676 ، 738 جرم، جريمة، جرائم210 ، 220 ، 390 ، 584 ، 590 مجرم،
متجرّم، متجرّمة570 ، 716 جزع124 ، 136 ، 152 ، 210 ، 252 ، 416 ، 504 ، 518
، 524 ، 542 ، 552 ، 590 ، 706 ، 730 ، 738 ، 770 جفاء312 ، 590 ، 666 جَل َ
د258 ، 698 جمعة412 ، 668 جنّة. كثير الوقوع جنون748 جهاد142 ، 146 ، 158 ،
178 ، 180 ، 248 ، 276 ، 294 ، 296 ، 298 ، 404 ، 412 ، 432 ، 470 ، 526 ،
532 ، 574 ، 604 ، 608 ، 618 ، 624 ، 630 ، 632 ، 684 ، 686 ، 718 ، 746 ،
794 ، 796 اجتهاد262 ، 518 جهل106 ، 112 ، 132 ، 166 ، 246 ، 258 ، 270 ،
278 ، 312 ، 334 ، 336 ، 372 ، 404 ، 428 ، 444 ، 452 ، 454 ، 482 ، 526 ،
666 ، 668 ، 686 ، 692 ، 706 ، 730 ، 766 ، 798 ، 822 أبرار110 ، 244 ، 248
، 378 ، 460 ، 462 ، 496 ، 552 ، 596 ، 708 برزخ502 ، 506 بر كة، بركات326
، 472 ، 544 بشاشة678 بِشر782 بشرى210 ، 354 بصيرة، بصائر126 ، 246 ، 268 ،
318 ، 338 ، 452 ، 470 ، 498 ، 516 ، 594 ، 596 ، 656 ، 722 ، 724 ، 766
تبعّل: حسن الـ718 بغض، بغضاء، بغيض132 ، 258 ، 306 ، 340 ، 362 ، 364 ، 424
، 464 ، 690 ، 704 ، 722 ، 764 ، 782 ، 784 بغي، باغي248 ، 290 ، 318 ، 328
، 334 ، 386 ، 442 ، 448 ، 450 ، 456 ، 464 ، 618 ، 622 ، 650 ، 742 ، 786
بقاء162 ، 208 ، 252 ، 274 ، 330 ، 330 ، 356 ، 410 ، 446 ، 484 ، 496 ،
526 ، 584 ، 636 ، 712 ، 732 ، 790 ، 794 ، 810 بلاء، ابتلاء146 ، 222 ،
244 ، 246 ، 250 ، 278 ، 316 ، 338 ، 398 ، 428 ، 436 ، 442 ، 446 ، 448 ،
450 ، 452 ، 462 ، 466 ، 498 ، 510 ، 514 ، 562 ، 578 ، 614 ، 626 ، 632 ،
706 ، 716 ، 720 ، 722 ، 770 ، 772 ، 786 ، 800 بهتان488 بيت الله114 ، 446
، 448 بيعة126 ، 146 ، 158 ، 196 ، 242 ، 320 ، 388 ، 536 ترجمان302 ، 772
تقوى. توحيد. توفيق. توكّل. انظر "و" توبة132 ، 184 ، 212 ، 238 ، 246 ، 332
، 414 ، 492 ، al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 996 index of religious
and ethical concepts, arabic حِدّة748 حدود الله456 ، 614 حديث )النبيّ(432 ،
474 ، 486 حذر202 ، 206 ، 312 ، 346 ، 366 ، 444 ، 464 ، 584 ، 642 ، 658 ،
684 ، 706 أحرار250 ، 302 ، 308 ، 744 ، 804 حرص124 ، 462 ، 496 ، 620 ،
628 ، 648 ، 706 ، 742 ، 792 تحريف344 حرمة352 ، 382 ، 388 ، 538 ، 554
حزم462 ، 642 ، 692 ، 730 حزن، أحزان، حزين110 ، 202 ، 218 ، 258 ، 282 ،
366 ، 478 ، 504 ، 572 ، 668 ، 696 ، 770 ، 782 ، 806 حَسَب136 ، 140 ، 406 ،
418 ، 442 ، 444 ، 612 ، 682 ، 688 ، 710 محتسب334 ، 642 حساب )الله(166 ،
188 ، 202 ، 206 ، 232 ، 256 ، 352 ، 356 ، 534 ، 540 ، 604 ، 606 ، 690 ،
712 حسد، تحاسد218 ، 236 ، 310 ، 384 ، 442 ، 466 ، 740 ، 748 ، 786 ، 792
حسرة160 ، 184 ، 274 ، 278 ، 606 ، 652 ، 810 حسن166 ، 272 ، 406 ، 430 ،
496 ، 510 ، 560 ، 580 ، 582 ، 590 ، 592 ، 622 ، 628 ، 630 ، 632 ، 636 ،
642 ، 646 ، 656 ، 674 ، 688 ، 708 ، 710 ، 712 ، 718 ، 742 ، 766 ، 798 ،
816 إحسان، محسن114 ، 132 ، 154 ، 188 ، 254 ، 406 ، 446 ، 460 ، 468 ، 496
، 548 ، 570 ، 590 ، 628 ، 644 ، 650 ، 710 ، 726 ، 728 ، 736 ، 742
محشر154 ، 216 جهالة، جهالات134 ، 216 ، 262 ، 322 ، 340 ، 444 ، 502 ، 508
، 572 ، 578 ، 718 ، 726 جاهل، جاهلون، جهلاء، جهّال116 ، 124 ، 132 ، 134 ،
198 ، 220 ، 246 ، 278 ، 280 ، 302 ، 312 ، 324 ، 450 ، 476 ، 502 ، 578 ،
592 ، 636 ، 644 ، 648 ، 664 ، 672 ، 694 ، 710 ، 722 ، 736 ، 744 ، 768 ،
778 ، 794 جاهليّة244 ، 246 ، 380 ، 384 ، 440 ، 442 ، 444 ، 454 ، 544 ،
548 ، 566 جهنّم372 ، 462 ، 546 جود226 ، 228 ، 254 ، 412 ، 738 ، 812
جور130 ، 134 ، 138 ، 196 ، 228 ، 302 ، 304 ، 306 ، 400 ، 482 ، 496 ، 602
، 624 ، 628 ، 634 ، 652 ، 668 ، 784 جار، جيران116 ، 174 ، 266 ، 280 ،
332 ، 336 ، 416 ، 464 ، 502 ، 514 ، 560 ، 592 ، 616 استجارة516 حب ّ ،
محبّة226 ، 234 ، 272 ، 284 ، 304 ، 316 ، 362 ، 396 ، 452 ، 472 ، 492 ،
496 ، 624 ، 644 ، 774 حبيب، أحبّة190 ، 506 ، 574 ، 592 ، 600 ، 694 ، 716
، 764 ، 782 حجّ114 حجّة، حجج112 ، 120 ، 138 ، 184 ، 188 ، 202 ، 204 ، 216
، 220 ، 222 ، 228 ، 230 ، 238 ، 278 ، 326 ، 344 ، 364 ، 386 ، 388 ، 394
، 398 ، 414 ، 418 ، 420 ، 432 ، 450 ، 494 ، 508 ، 510 ، 544 ، 600 ، 632
، 634 ، 646 ، 648 ، 652 ، 722 ، 770 احتجاج674 احتجاب الولاة642 حجاب
)النساء(594 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة997 حلال262 ، 464 ، 606 وحرام112 ، 202 ، 222 ، 282 ، 398 ، 412
، 576 ، 666 حلم، حليم، حلماء280 ، 290 ، 358 ، 436 ، 454 ، 462 ، 464 ،
526 ، 602 ، 630 ، 662 ، 672 ، 684 ، 686 ، 702 ، 736 ، 738 ، 740 ، 806 ،
808 ، 816 حمق، أحمق688 ، 786 ، 815 احتمال452 ، 678 حميّة110 ، 164 ، 440 ،
442 ، 646 ، 756 محاباة634 حاجة196 ، 228 ، 268 ، 350 ، 370 ، 428 ، 432 ،
590 ، 630 ، 640 ، 664 ، 696 ، 714 ، 748 ، 764 ، 790 ، 810 فوت الـ694
قضاء الـ704 حياء634 ، 682 ، 692 ، 710 ، 740 حيف560 ، 616 ، 642 ، 760 ،
820 حياة، حيّ، أحياء. كثير الوقوع خبيث316 ، 486 خديعة298 ، 464 ، 608
خذلان148 ، 330 خراج620 ، 622 ، 624 ، 630 ، 634 ، 654 ، 822 خرق232 ، 238
، 268 ، 510 ، 588 ، 640 ، 790 خزي338 ، 558 خشوع، تخشيع234 ، 446 ، 448 ،
462 خاشع، خاشعين270 ، 296 ، 464 خشية140 ، 186 ، 490 ، 638 خصومة، خصوم،
خصام192 ، 558 ، 578 ، 632 ، 752 ، 754 ، 772 خضوع256 ، 342 ، 590 خفض
الجناح560 ، 616 حقّ106 ، 114 ، 116 ، 122 ، 126 ، 132 ، 134 ، 136 ، 146 ،
150 ، 152 ، 158 ، 162 ، 166 ، 188 ، 194 ، 214 ، 220 ، 228 ، 262 ، 266 ،
268 ، 272 ، 282 ، 288 ، 290 ، 292 ، 298 ، 300 ، 304 ، 306 ، 308 ، 318 ،
322 ، 326 ، 334 ، 338 ، 344 ، 350 ، 356 ، 366 ، 368 ، 386 ، 388 ، 390 ،
392 ، 394 ، 396 ، 404 ، 406 ، 412 ، 418 ، 436 ، 458 ، 464 ، 472 ، 474 ،
476 ، 482 ، 492 ، 510 ، 516 ، 522 ، 554 ، 556 ، 568 ، 572 ، 574 ، 590 ،
592 ، 602 ، 608 ، 616 ، 618 ، 620 ، 626 ، 628 ، 630 ، 632 ، 638 ، 640 ،
644 ، 650 ، 652 ، 658 ، 662 ، 664 ، 666 ، 668 ، 670 ، 682 ، 686 ، 712 ،
722 ، 726 ، 728 ، 730 ، 746 ، 774 ، 784 ، 802 وباطل110 ، 124 ، 130 ، 138
، 142 ، 148 ، 156 ، 164 ، 172 ، 182 ، 190 ، 248 ، 260 ، 302 ، 310 ، 324
، 332 ، 372 ، 380 ، 400 ، 414 ، 444 ، 466 ، 470 ، 486 ، 496 ، 526 ، 596
، 606 ، 642 ، 680 ، 734 ، 762 ، 796 حقوق216 ، 254 ، 294 ، 312 ، 324 ،
380 ، 382 ، 384 ، 432 ، 484 ، 494 ، 496 ، 498 ، 546 ، 558 ، 744 ، 754 ،
806 ، 814 حقد، أحقاد280 ، 442 ، 626 احتكار638 حُكم، أحكام. كثير الوقوع
حكّام452 ، 454 حكمة، حكم138 ، 198 ، 228 ، 230 ، 246 ، 248 ، 268 ، 276 ،
294 ، 314 ، 334 ، 338 ، 340 ، 344 ، 350 ، 358 ، 410 ، 418 ، 474 ، 526 ،
574 ، 678 ، 684 ، 686 ، 698 ، 700 ، 706 ، 724 ، 730 ، 734 ، 820 حكيم،
حكماء340 ، 346 ، 416 ، 436 ، 628 ، 718 ، 762 ، 766 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 998 index
of religious and ethical concepts, arabic خيانة140 ، 142 ، 558 ، 604 ،
634 ، 670 تدبير186 ، 228 ، 230 ، 408 ، 428 ، 490 ، 682 ، 704 ، 708 ، 816
دعاء132 ، 162 ، 296 ، 370 ، 492 ، 506 ، 508 ، 514 ، 516 ، 518 ، 544 ،
582 ، 584 ، 706 ، 718 ، 720 ، 772 ، 812 ، 822 دعوة114 ، 150 ، 230 ، 282
، 298 ، 322 ، 364 ، 452 ، 560 ، 620 ، 672 ، 730 داعي138 ، 140 ، 206 ،
210 ، 270 ، 272 ، 274 ، 280 ، 284 ، 290 ، 312 ، 336 ، 348 ، 364 ، 382 ،
562 ، 630 ، 742 ، 778 ، 784 دم، دماء134 ، 146 ، 176 ، 178 ، 196 ، 240 ،
262 ، 312 ، 342 ، 392 ، 398 ، 438 ، 502 ، 536 ، 540 ، 542 ، 552 ، 608 ،
618 ، 650 ، 662 حقن الـ482 ، 748 سفك الـ138 ، 144 ، 174 ، 318 ، 410 ،
644 دنيا. كثير الوقوع دهر154 ، 160 ، 222 ، 226 ، 270 ، 274 ، 286 ، 354 ،
368 ، 394 ، 444 ، 504 ، 538 ، 560 ، 562 ، 572 ، 574 ، 576 ، 588 ، 612 ،
626 ، 670 ، 694 ، 720 ، 768 ، 800 دواء358 ، 462 ، 466 ، 470 ، 474 ، 586
، 678 ، 762 دين. كثير الوقوع ذ كر الله250 ، 278 ، 476 ، 506 ، 650
المعاد646 ، 690 الموت214 ، 430 ، 574 ، 584 ، 666 ، 786 ذلّ، ذل ّ ة، مذل ّ
ة154 ، 174 ، 206 ، 236 ، 248 ، 358 ، 384 ، 442 ، 452 ، 502 ، 508 ، 634 ،
780 خل ّ ة242 ، 782 ، 814 إخلاص106 ، 114 ، 276 ، 284 ، 382 ، 466 ، 746
مخالطة680 خلاف، مخالفة134 ، 142 ، 160 ، 260 ، 374 ، 386 ، 436 ، 480 ،
572 ، 636 ، 664 ، 706 ، 738 ، 744 خليفة170 ، 410 ، 550 ، 572 خَلق، خلقة.
كثير الوقوع خُلق، أخلاق128 ، 222 ، 398 ، 450 ، 456 ، 492 ، 510 ، 574 ،
634 ، 636 ، 688 ، 708 ، 742 ، 802 ، 808 خُمس764 خوف، مخافة154 ، 156 ، 208
، 218 ، 224 ، 234 ، 244 ، 250 ، 278 ، 284 ، 358 ، 360 ، 392 ، 404 ، 406
، 412 ، 422 ، 428 ، 452 ، 462 ، 488 ، 502 ، 510 ، 538 ، 542 ، 548 ، 560
، 602 ، 612 ، 614 ، 650 ، 686 ، 706 ، 758 خائف154 ، 326 ، 332 ، 342 ،
346 ، 722 خيبة138 ، 240 ، 682 خير132 ، 140 ، 142 ، 152 ، 168 ، 194 ، 220
، 240 ، 242 ، 246 ، 248 ، 260 ، 262 ، 266 ، 278 ، 284 ، 286 ، 296 ، 306
، 324 ، 362 ، 364 ، 390 ، 400 ، 458 ، 492 ، 534 ، 546 ، 552 ، 566 ، 574
، 576 ، 584 ، 590 ، 594 ، 628 ، 636 ، 638 ، 648 ، 670 ، 682 ، 692 ، 698
، 702 ، 704 ، 714 ، 720 ، 726 ، 730 ، 742 ، 746 ، 770 ، 790 ، 794 ، 796
، 812 ، 820 وشرّ116 ، 144 ، 192 ، 282 ، 308 ، 356 ، 382 ، 398 ، 450 ، 464
، 516 ، 548 ، 560 ، 586 ، 588 ، 596 ، 686 ، 800 ، 808 استخارة576
خيرات326 ، 344 ، 444 ، 684 ، 702 ءالَ يُخ440 ، 448 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس
المفاهيم الدينيّة والأخلاقيّة999 718 ، 742 ، 746 ، 762 ، 766 ، 786 ، 788 ،
796 ، 806 ، 810 رسالة، رسول، رسل، مرسلين. كثير الوقوع رشد208 ، 246 ، 294
، 334 ، 336 ، 466 ، 558 ، 578 ، 592 ، 808 رضى، رضاء، راضي278 ، 284 ، 404
، 444 ، 478 ، 496 ، 536 ، 562 ، 626 ، 642 ، 678 ، 702 ، 706 ، 724 ، 784
792 رعاية، راعي، رعاة158 ، 176 ، 248 ، 250 ، 254 ، 348 ، 412 ، 434 ، 526
، 702 ، 722 ، 760 رغبة234 ، 278 ، 366 ، 446 ، 470 ، 482 ، 508 ، 578 ،
646 ، 744 ، 788 ، 792 ، 814 ورهبة148 ، 176 ، 548 رفد204 ، 630 رفق588 ،
616 ، 630 ، 634 ، 636 ، 668 ترقّب، تراقب466 ، 684 أرامل604 رهبة148 ، 176
، 422 ، 446 ، 548 ، 580 ، 744 رَوح، راحة212 ، 508 ، 700 ، 796 رُوح110 ،
212 ، 274 ، 282 ، 378 ، 440 ، 540 ، 722 روع212 ، 434 ، 554 ، 602 ، 654 ،
788 رأفة548 رواية الخـبر، رواة526 ، 702 رياء، مراء140 ، 218 ، 686 ، 766
، 790 ريب232 ، 272 ، 280 ، 600 زكاة180 ، 276 ، 448 ، 450 ، 476 ، 512 ،
718 ، 720 ، 738 ، 746 زمان128 ، 144 ، 166 ، 186 ، 216 ، 224 ، 260 ، 270
، 332 ، 402 ، 408 ، 426 ، 474 ، 496 ، 506 ، 522 ، 572 ، 592 ، 600 ، 604
، 704 ، 710 ، 724 ، 738 ، 820 ذليل، أذل ّ ة150 ، 162 ، 186 ، 190 ، 258 ،
270 ، 280 ، 356 ، 522 ، 544 ، 586 تذلّل، تذليل440 ، 442 ، 448 ذمّ، تذمّم128
، 134 ، 148 ، 190 ، 192 ، 202 ، 302 ، 310 ، 322 ، 336 ، 404 ، 428 ، 438
، 506 ، 514 ، 524 ، 552 ، 568 ، 606 ، 692 ، 716 الدنيا360 ، 714 ، 716
ذمّة، ذمم266 ، 630 ، 642 ، 644 ، 654 ، 726 ذنب، ذنوب128 ، 198 ، 212 ، 278
، 288 ، 304 ، 322 ، 326 ، 402 ، 436 ، 476 ، 490 ، 508 ، 568 ، 570 ، 584
، 614 ، 682 ، 698 ، 702 ، 722 ، 724 ، 728 ، 744 ، 752 ، 772 ، 786 ، 792
، 808 ، 822 رأي122 ، 132 ، 134 ، 142 ، 148 ، 160 ، 168 ، 222 ، 262 ، 268
، 290 ، 294 ، 298 ، 306 ، 320 ، 352 ، 384 ، 400 ، 438 ، 482 ، 536 ، 548
، 574 ، 576 ، 578 ، 594 ، 600 ، 648 ، 654 ، 666 ، 670 ، 688 ، 690 ، 692
، 698 ، 710 ، 726 ، 728 ، 738 ، 780 ، 784 رجاء208 ، 234 ، 236 ، 250 ،
288 ، 294 ، 360 ، 428 ، 466 ، 502 ، 588 ، 706 رحمة106 ، 110 ، 170 ، 224
، 240 ، 260 ، 266 ، 276 ، 288 ، 298 ، 326 ، 354 ، 358 ، 378 ، 390 ، 430
، 434 ، 448 ، 464 ، 468 ، 472 ، 508 ، 560 ، 584 ، 624 ، 626 ، 640 ، 644
، 646 ، 700 ، 716 ، 770 ، 806 ردّ الحجر776 تردّد288 ، 670 ، 686 رزق،
أرزاق140 ، 208 ، 224 ، 226 ، 238 ، 270 ، 286 ، 288 ، 326 ، 330 ، 350 ،
352 ، 420 ، 422 ، 514 ، 578 ، 584 ، 590 ، 634 ، 702 ، al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1000 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic سرور110 ، 258 ، 286 ، 366 ، 504 ،
518 ، 552 ، 664 ، 716 ، 748 ، 782 سريرة، سرائر206 ، 216 ، 268 ، 284 ،
294 ، 312 ، 336 ، 516 ، 540 ، 558 ، 690 ، 712 ، 766 ، 784 ، 808 إسراف304
، 550 ، 634 ، 638 سرقة748 سعادة، سعيد194 ، 210 ، 218 ، 308 ، 356 ، 646
سعير212 ، 434 ، 440 ساعة )الحشر(136 ، 184 ، 242 ، 260 ، 268 ، 308 ، 354
، 356 ، 364 ، 382 ، 434 ، 440 ، 470 ، 706 سلطان126 ، 160 ، 186 ، 272 ،
280 ، 312 ، 360 ، 384 ، 418 ، 424 ، 426 ، 428 ، 442 ، 454 ، 466 ، 474 ،
494 ، 580 ، 580 ، 592 ، 596 ، 600 ، 626 ، 644 ، 648 ، 704 ، 762 ، 768 ،
782 سكر686 سكرة، سكرات158 ، 210 ، 274 ، 338 ، 340 ، 346 ، 518 سكوت770
سكون، سكينة، تسكين186 ، 232 ، 336 ، 424 ، 448 ، 502 ، 504 ، 508 ، 556 ،
650 سلم218 ، 220 ، 264 ، 300 ، 320 ، 380 ، 382 ، 392 ، 422 ، 430 ، 474 ،
534 ، 538 ، 638 ، 656 ، 662 ، 794 ، 810 سلام478 ، 748 دار السلام246
تسليم178 ، 298 ، 712 استسلام206 ، 446 ، 686 مسالمة678 إسلام، مسلم،
مسلمين، مسلمات. كثير الوقوع سلوّ738 ، 804 زنا748 زهد، زهادة102 ، 150 ،
154 ، 196 ، 202 ، 208 ، 464 ، 560 ، 574 ، 590 ، 678 ، 684 ، 710 ، 800 ،
812 ، 814 زاهد، زهّاد102 ، 104 ، 156 ، 258 ، 282 ، 520 ، 706 ، 722 ، 814
زهو628 ، 744 زاد، تزوّد، متزوّد150 ، 170 ، 184 ، 198 ، 206 ، 210 ، 216 ،
280 ، 282 ، 284 ، 314 ، 356 ، 416 ، 480 ، 518 ، 560 ، 582 ، 588 ، 614 ،
696 ، 714 ، 716 ، 740 زور220 ، 488 ، 618 زيغ236 ، 298 ، 686 سَبْق426 ، 548
سابق، سبّاقون، سبّاقين112 ، 130 ، 138 ، 356 ، 394 ، 540 ، 714 سابقة،
سابقات198 ، 304 ، 538 سِباق، سبقة148 ، 150 ، 264 ستر154 ، 232 ، 268 ، 316
، 322 ، 338 ، 362 ، 510 ، 602 ، 626 ، 684 ، 710 ، 746 دجاس ،دَ ّجُس236 ،
250 ، 440 مسجد128 ، 226 ، 716 سخط، ساخط110 ، 272 ، 366 ، 384 ، 404 ، 414
، 444 ، 478 ، 580 ، 626 ، 678 ، 702 ، 742 ، 784 سخاء، سخيّ308 ، 630 ، 632
سرّ116 ، 146 ، 150 ، 154 ، 238 ، 248 ، 256 ، 268 ، 270 ، 272 ، 278 ، 312
، 442 ، 480 ، 516 ، 558 ، 588 ، 590 ، 598 ، 620 ، 634 ، 666 ، 678 ، 768
تحصين الـ692 كتمان الـ726 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة1001 شرائع الدين264 ، 294 ، 364 ، 472 شرف138 ، 218 ، 266 ، 304
، 324 ، 366 ، 474 ، 504 ، 540 ، 632 ، 710 ، 732 ، 792 تشريف554 ، 748
شرك218 ، 284 ، 400 ، 428 ، 548 ، 562 ، 746 مشرك، مشركين، مشركات544 ، 562
، 644 ش َ رَه628 ، 792 شيطان، شياطين. كثير الوقوع شفيع، شافع396 ، 466 ،
468 ، 472 ، 694 ، 792 شفق، شفقة، شفيق160 ، 206 ، 210 ، 234 ، 236 ، 366 ،
510 ، 578 ، 556 ، 576 ، 580 ، 622 شفاء278 ، 344 ، 352 ، 396 ، 466 ، 470
، 474 ، 492 ، 664 ، 716 شقاق128 ، 256 ، 362 ، 534 ، 540 ، 570 ، 600 ،
646 مشقّة352 ، 424 ، 582 ، 688 شقوة، شقيّ110 ، 166 ، 184 ، 194 ، 218 ، 308
، 356 ، 366 ، 644 ، 676 ، 806 شكّ154 ، 178 ، 232 ، 284 ، 286 ، 392 ، 448
، 546 ، 686 ، 702 ، 712 ، 722 ، 766 شكر، شاكر، شكور202 ، 226 ، 238 ، 284
، 304 ، 322 ، 354 ، 358 ، 406 ، 414 ، 432 ، 436 ، 464 ، 526 ، 532 ، 626
، 668 ، 680 ، 718 ، 722 ، 736 ، 744 ، 766 ، 770 ، 782 ، 784 ، 812
شَكاة568 ، 642 تشمير510 ، 738 شنآن442 ، 544 ، 686 شهوة، شهوات184 ، 194 ،
200 ، 208 ، 218 ، 222 ، 234 ، 254 ، 266 ، 272 ، 278 ، 366 ، 378 ، 394 ،
422 ، 464 ، 518 ، 572 ، 624 ، 684 ، 692 ، 722 ، 724 ، 732 ، 746 ، 814
مشاورة، مشورة، استشارة350 ، 480 ، 498 ، 594 ، 628 ، 688 ، 692 ، 704 ،
710 ، 738 سفيه، سفهاء160 ، 326 ، 450 ، 454 ، 738 ، 740 ، 746 سمح،
سماحة638 ، 630 ، 686 سمعة140 ، 782 سنّة112 ، 132 ، 180 ، 228 ، 264 ، 302
، 312 ، 320 ، 330 ، 338 ، 372 ، 398 ، 412 ، 476 ، 516 ، 558 ، 628 ، 630
، 646 ، 674 ، 684 ، 712 ، 752 سُنن122 ، 278 ، 322 ، 334 ، 348 ، 380 ، 460
، 496 ، 624 ، 628 تسويف768 سؤال، مسألة212 ، 228 ، 366 ، 478 ، 516 ، 576
، 584 ، 640 ، 642 ، 692 ، 696 ، 752 ، 786 ، 790 سيّئة، سيّئات174 ، 210 ،
312 ، 326 ، 332 ، 510 ، 584 ، 686 ، 690 ، 692 مسيء154 ، 188 ، 650 شبهة،
شبهات114 ، 130 ، 132 ، 138 ، 162 ، 186 ، 220 ، 222 ، 232 ، 266 ، 298 ،
318 ، 334 ، 354 ، 384 ، 506 ، 578 ، 594 ، 632 ، 662 ، 708 ، 722 ، 802
شجاعة، شجاع148 ، 632 ، 630 ، 678 ، 692 شحّ، شحيح366 ، 510 ، 612 ، 624 ،
638 شدّة120 ، 224 ، 298 ، 376 ، 434 ، 462 ، 548 ، 550 ، 594 ، 602 ، 604 ،
616 ، 728 ، 758 ، 786 شرّ116 ، 144 ، 180 ، 192 ، 214 ، 260 ، 266 ، 276 ،
282 ، 286 ، 304 ، 308 ، 356 ، 372 ، 380 ، 382 ، 392 ، 398 ، 462 ، 464 ،
516 ، 534 ، 548 ، 560 ، 572 ، 588 ، 592 ، 596 ، 604 ، 628 ، 668 ، 686 ،
712 ، 726 ، 728 ، 744 ، 776 ، 782 ، 796 ، 800 ، 822 .انظر أيضًا خير وشرّ
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1002 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic مصادقة688 صرم588 صفح576 ، 624
صلاح، استصلاح142 ، 268 ، 470 ، 496 ، 620 ، 624 ، 634 ، 670 ، 706 ، 710
ذات البين616 صلاة192 ، 202 ، 226 ، 276 ، 312 ، 476 ، 562 ، 564 ، 616 ،
622 ، 640 ، 702 ، 718 ، 746 ، 790 مصل ّ ى716 صلوات194 ، 448 صلة، تواصل.
انظر "و" صمت248 ، 334 ، 348 ، 464 ، 526 ، 586 ، 730 ، 740 ، 782 ، 820
أصنام144 ، 230 ، 452 صواب462 ، 582 ، 636 ، 746 ، 762 ، 784 صوم، صيام202
، 276 ، 296 ، 448 ، 616 ، 718 ، 720 ، 746 ، 808 أضحية176 ضغن، أضغان،
ضغائن120 ، 248 ، 280 ، 352 ، 520 ، 544 ضلال، ضلالة، ضِل ّ ة، ضالّ112 ، 124
، 132 ، 134 ، 148 ، 162 ، 178 ، 230 ، 268 ، 270 ، 304 ، 322 ، 332 ، 334
، 340 ، 344 ، 396 ، 406 ، 444 ، 472 ، 482 ، 488 ، 492 ، 498 ، 502 ، 516
، 536 ، 574 ، 578 ، 600 ، 612 ، 656 ، 662 ، 686 ، 730 ، 760 إطراء496 ،
628 ، 632 ، 644 طعن186 ، 300 ، 404 ، 442 ، 450 ، 530 ، 536 ، 546
طغيان356 شوق، مشتاق378 ، 462 ، 656 ، 684 ، 722 شيب: تغيير الـ682 ، 822
شيمة262 صبر118 ، 198 ، 202 ، 238 ، 264 ، 284 ، 298 ، 338 ، 354 ، 390 ،
392 ، 396 ، 416 ، 430 ، 452 ، 462 ، 464 ، 478 ، 482 ، 524 ، 574 ، 592 ،
626 ، 644 ، 678 ، 684 ، 692 ، 698 ، 710 ، 720 ، 730 ، 738 ، 770 ، 804
صابر، صبور300 ، 464 ، 478 ، 600 ، 642 ، 724 ، 782 صحّة274 ، 584 ، 748 ،
800 وسقم208 ، 416 صحبة، صاحب120 ، 142 ، 156 ، 170 ، 178 ، 218 ، 244 ،
248 ، 250 ، 280 ، 304 ، 306 ، 314 ، 316 ، 332 ، 334 ، 336 ، 362 ، 366 ،
398 ، 404 ، 460 ، 482 ، 486 ، 552 ، 556 ، 570 ، 592 ، 620 ، 622 ، 652 ،
664 ، 666 ، 706 ، 748 ، 756 ، 762 ، 786 ، 788 ، 794 ، 822 صدق122 ، 140 ،
166 ، 178 ، 206 ، 220 ، 250 ، 302 ، 326 ، 332 ، 356 ، 402 ، 522 ، 628 ،
634 ، 640 ، 686 ، 690 ، 716 ، 748 ، 782 و كذب270 ، 486 ، 574 ، 642 ، 816
تصديق106 ، 264 ، 358 ، 446 ، 460 ، 626 ، 650 ، 712 ، 718 صادق150 ، 218 ،
226 ، 334 ، 348 ، 376 ، 394 ، 408 ، 500 ، 510 ، 526 ، 550 صدقة، صدقات278
، 512 ، 554 ، 558 ، 678 ، 704 ، 718 ، 720 ، 750 ، 764 صديق580 ، 588 ،
590 ، 592 ، 718 ، 740 ، 744 ، 772 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة1003 ظنّ، ظنون222 ، 232 ، 238 ، 252 ، 440 ، 462 ، 496 ، 510 ،
512 ، 538 ، 590 ، 616 ، 696 ، 740 ، 746 حسن، صالح الـ548 ، 560 ، 628 ،
630 ، 636 ، 642 ، 710 سوء الـ478 ، 628 ، 636 ، 710 ، 726 عبث184 ، 216 ،
468 ، 696 ، 792 عبادة110 ، 114 ، 170 ، 234 ، 272 ، 332 ، 346 ، 386 ، 396
، 458 ، 462 ، 472 ، 558 ، 668 ، 702 ، 704 ، 710 ، 744 عباد الله. كثير
الوقوع عبرة، عبر، اعتبار112 ، 130 ، 136 ، 204 ، 208 ، 214 ، 264 ، 278 ،
286 ، 336 ، 344 ، 356 ، 410 ، 446 ، 452 ، 490 ، 502 ، 504 ، 552 ، 636 ،
684 ، 724 ، 772 ، 790 عثرة، عثرات212 ، 416 ، 434 ، 682 ، عُجْب، إعجاب118 ،
132 ، 138 ، 146 ، 214 ، 222 ، 234 ، 270 ، 368 ، 420 ، 538 ، 562 ، 582 ،
644 ، 728 ، 740 ، 744 عجائب134 ، 228 ، 230 ، 344 ، 350 ، 374 ، 466 ، 490
عجز، عاجز158 ، 186 ، 228 ، 250 ، 418 ، 426 ، 580 ، 654 ، 678 ، 680 ، 736
، 798 ، 816 عجلة، معاجلة646 ، 346 ، 766 ، 790 استعداد168 ، 518 عدل130 ،
194 ، 220 ، 222 ، 240 ، 246 ، 266 ، 306 ، 310 ، 318 ، 320 ، 400 ، 418 ،
436 ، 474 ، 492 ، 494 ، 496 ، 498 ، 510 ، 516 ، 554 ، 560 ، 616 ، 626 ،
630 ، 636 ، 638 ، 652 ، 668 ، 684 ، 740 ، 742 ، 796 ، 812 ، 822 وجور130
، 302 ، 624 ، 652 ، 668 ، 784 طلب154 ، 182 ، 206 ، 210 ، 262 ، 286 ، 370
، 392 ، 462 ، 472 ، 516 ، 534 ، 540 ، 546 ، 578 ، 580 ، 586 ، 600 ، 622
، 634 ، 640 ، 642 ، 644 ، 648 ، 652 ، 660 ، 668 ، 694 ، 712 ، 728 ، 798
، 800 ، 802 ، 810 طمع، مطامع، طامع152 ، 308 ، 330 ، 362 ، 430 ، 462 ،
464 ، 466 ، 496 ، 586 ، 592 ، 598 ، 612 ، 632 ، 634 ، 678 ، 706 ، 708 ،
728 ، 766 ، 740 طهر، مطهّر، تطهير246 ، 262 ، 362 ، 424 ، 614 ، 626 ، 646
طاعة158 ، 184 ، 234 ، 236 ، 276 ، 292 ، 328 ، 332 ، 370 ، 388 ، 392 ،
400 ، 422 ، 434 ، 444 ، 454 ، 470 ، 472 ، 492 ، 496 ، 526 ، 558 ، 568 ،
572 ، 620 ، 666 ، 668 ، 720 ، 724 ، 748 ، 782 ، 810 وعصيان، معصية342 ،
394 ، 450 ، 460 ، 466 ، 534 ، 648 ، 726 ، 798 ، 804 ، 806 طَول،
استطالة406 ، 620 ، 704 ، 740 طوبى400 ، 492 ، 614 ، 690 ، 706 ، 712 ، 768
ظفر128 ، 146 ، 200 ، 290 ، 564 ، 590 ، 606 ، 680 ، 692 ، 694 ، 724 ، 738
، 782 ، 792 ظلم، ظالم، مظلوم120 ، 154 ، 180 ، 248 ، 252 ، 312 ، 320 ،
318 ، 342 ، 344 ، 358 ، 392 ، 400 ، 418 ، 448 ، 464 ، 494 ، 512 ، 568 ،
570 ، 582 ، 588 ، 590 ، 606 ، 608 ، 616 ، 626 ، 628 ، 646 ، 650 ، 654 ،
710 ، 730 ، 746 ، 748 ، 772 ، 784 ، 786 ، 794 ظلمة، ظلماء، ظلمات122 ،
134 ، 210 ، 216 ، 220 ، 266 ، 268 ، 280 ، 340 ، 344 ، 350 ، 354 ، 356 ،
358 ، 370 ، 402 ، 434 ، 470 ، 506 ، 594 ، 612 ، 662 .انظر أيضًا نور وظلمة
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1004 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic 430 ، 440 ، 510 ، 522 ، 596 ، 724
، 770 ، 786 ، 792 .انظر أيضًا طاعة وعصيان، معصية عطف322 ، 378 ، 620 ، 628
، 632 ، 738 ، 746 عطاء، إعطاء226 ، 240 ، 304 ، 404 ، 468 ، 514 ، 576 ،
584 ، 626 ، 646 ، 694 عفّة، عفاف270 ، 586 ، 692 ، 694 ، 748 ، 784 عفو448
، 510 ، 516 ، 552 ، 624 ، 626 ، 668 ، 680 ، 692 ، 738 ، 808 عافية208 ،
212 ، 222 ، 252 ، 320 ، 450 ، 504 ، 514 ، 716 ، 800 ، 808 عقوق444
عاقبة132 ، 396 ، 448 ، 588 ، 590 ، 618 ، 640 ، 666 ، 724 ، 738 عواقب122
، 162 ، 186 ، 312 ، 390 ، 406 ، 634 ، 644 العاقبة للمتّقين120 ، 252
عقل218 ، 228 ، 264 ، 272 ، 274 ، 348 ، 360 ، 364 ، 366 ، 434 ، 476 ، 494
، 500 ، 504 ، 508 ، 514 ، 522 ، 526 ، 534 ، 536 ، 588 ، 626 ، 658 ، 660
، 676 ، 692 ، 694 ، 702 ، 708 ، 720 ، 738 ، 748 ، 754 ، 768 ، 772 ، 778
، 802 ، 808 ، 814 عاقل592 ، 678 ، 688 ، 710 ، 744 ، 800 علم، علوم112 ،
114 ، 116 ، 124 ، 134 ، 138 ، 148 ، 152 ، 154 ، 166 ، 186 ، 194 ، 198 ،
200 ، 228 ، 236 ، 238 ، 240 ، 264 ، 268 ، 270 ، 276 ، 278 ، 284 ، 290 ،
298 ، 308 ، 328 ، 334 ، 336 ، 344 ، 348 ، 352 ، 358 ، 370 ، 390 ، 398 ،
406 ، 414 ، 422 ، 426 ، 428 ، 436 ، 448 ، 456 ، 462 ، 464 ، 468 ، 474 ،
476 ، 490 ، 492 ، 516 ، 526 ، 576 ، 584 ، 610 ، 642 ، 662 ، 678 ، 684 ،
686 ، 690 ، 700 ، عدوان298 ، 342 ، 346 ، 482 ، 622 ، 740 ، 794 عدوّ،
أعداء. كثير الوقوع عذر، إعذار، معذرة202 ، 204 ، 216 ، 238 ، 276 ، 326 ،
332 ، 468 ، 474 ، 482 ، 508 ، 510 ، 544 ، 568 ، 590 ، 622 ، 626 ، 630 ،
638 ، 640 ، 642 ، 644 ، 646 ، 652 ، 660 ، 672 ، 768 ، 770 ، 782 معرفة110
، 148 ، 226 ، 410 ، 432 ، 436 ، 488 ، 572 ، 720 ، 740 معروف134 ، 174 ،
202 ، 222 ، 224 ، 278 ، 324 ، 332 ، 412 ، 422 ، 464 ، 522 ، 554 ، 602 ،
736 ، 794 أمر بـالـ310 ، 352 ، 454 ، 574 ، 618 ، 686 ، 746 ، 796 عزّ،
عزّة108 ، 114 ، 158 ، 228 ، 232 ، 236 ، 252 ، 310 ، 314 ، 366 ، 408 ، 412
، 426 ، 438 ، 446 ، 450 ، 452 ، 454 ، 468 ، 472 ، 476 ، 490 ، 496 ، 502
، 566 ، 600 ، 628 ، 630 ، 746 ، 782 ، 792 وذلّ158 ، 248 ، 270 ، 428 ، 438
، 452 ، 474 ، 496 ، 534 إعزاز316 ، 490 ، 624 عزم، عزيمة، عزائم110 ، 112
، 114 ، 170 ، 182 ، 194 ، 232 ، 234 ، 264 ، 346 ، 386 ، 438 ، 442 ، 446
، 452 ، 460 ، 510 ، 526 ، 592 ، 594 ، 746 ، 756 ، 806 ، 812 ، 824 عسف،
تعسّف، متعسّف344 ، 556 ، 778 ، 822 عصبيّة438 ، 440 ، 442 ، 444 ، 450
عصمة322 ، 352 ، 384 ، 786 اعتصام340 ، 526 بحبل الله574 عصيان، معصية114 ،
142 ، 148 ، 154 ، 160 ، 184 ، 216 ، 238 ، 256 ، 276 ، 322 ، 344 ،
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة1005 استعاذة700 ، 778 استعانة، معونة200 ، 232 ، 280 ، 304 ،
330 ، 350 ، 404 ، 428 ، 480 ، 578 ، 596 ، 622 ، 626 ، 628 ، 630 ، 632 ،
654 ، 718 ، 736 عار188 ، 300 ، 386 ، 454 ، 568 ، 634 ، 648 ، 678 ع ِ
يّ314 ، 432 ، 466 ، 504 ، 506 ، 640 ، 786 عيب، عيوب، عائب116 ، 212 ، 222
، 284 ، 322 ، 360 ، 364 ، 400 ، 412 ، 516 ، 626 ، 636 ، 638 ، 642 ، 678
، 692 ، 740 ، 786 ، 788 ، 792 ، 796 غبط، مغبوط218 ، 274 ، 286 ، 762 ،
798 غدر122 ، 166 ، 196 ، 388 ، 478 ، 500 ، 514 ، 644 ، 738 ، 750 غِرّة،
غرور116 ، 204 ، 210 ، 218 ، 220 ، 224 ، 274 ، 278 ، 282 ، 342 ، 392 ،
532 ، 572 ، 662 ، 706 ، 768 ، 784 غربة، غريب212 ، 282 ، 356 ، 500 ، 516
، 574 ، 592 ، 678 ، 692 ، 694 ، 702 ، 714 ، 748 غِش ّ218 ، 292 ، 396 ،
558 ، 588 ، 768 غصب744 غض ّ البصر128 ، 154 ، 300 ، 462 غضب416 ، 442 ،
468 ، 512 ، 530 ، 630 ، 646 ، 666 ، 668 ، 672 ، 674 ، 686 ، 706 ، 728
غفران، مغفرة112 ، 114 ، 170 ، 174 ، 200 ، 240 ، 718 ، 812 ، استغفار326 ،
700 ، 718 ، 806 غفلة108 ، 152 ، 158 ، 184 ، 216 ، 268 ، 272 ، 344 ، 346
، 430 ، 464 ، 510 ، 540 ، 608 ، 636 ، 666 ، 740 غلبة124 ، 216 ، 452 ،
564 ، 786 ، 818 غالب، مغلوب224 ، 264 ، 280 ، 322 ، 366 ، 436 ، 454 ، 490
، 518 ، 564 ، 758 ، 782 ، 796 علم، علوم )cont. ( 702 ، 706 ، 710 ، 720 ،
722 ، 736 ، 740 ، 766 ، 768 ، 784 ، 790 ، 794 ، 810 ، 822 عالم، علماء108
، 116 ، 120 ، 132 ، 134 ، 160 ، 186 ، 190 ، 220 ، 258 ، 269 ، 302 ، 312
، 342 ، 440 ، 446 ، 448 ، 456 ، 462 ، 474 ، 490 ، 522 ، 562 ، 628 ، 648
، 664 ، 706 ، 720 ، 778 ، 794 عليم308 ، 336 ، 368 تعليم، تعلّم158 ، 200 ،
308 ، 436 ، 576 ، 578 ، 694 علياء، علوّ120 ، 122 ، 172 ، 268 ، 380 ، 420
، 458 ، 578 ، 816 تعمّق228 ، 686 عمل120 ، 140 ، 148 ، 150 ، 154 ، 166 ،
198 ، 204 ، 208 ، 216 ، 222 ، 246 ، 258 ، 274 ، 284 ، 286 ، 302 ، 308 ،
312 ، 314 ، 320 ، 328 ، 348 ، 360 ، 372 ، 384 ، 396 ، 400 ، 406 ، 408 ،
416 ، 436 ، 440 ، 460 ، 464 ، 476 ، 494 ، 496 ، 498 ، 518 ، 522 ، 526 ،
534 ، 562 ، 594 ، 596 ، 616 ، 618 ، 624 ، 628 ، 634 ، 640 ، 642 ، 646 ،
648 ، 652 ، 666 ، 682 ، 686 ، 690 ، 702 ، 708 ، 712 ، 714 ، 722 ، 724 ،
740 ، 764 ، 766 ، 784 ، 786 ، 790 ، 798 ، 806 ، 816 . عامل. أعمال. كثير
الوقوع عمى216 ، 218 ، 220 ، 328 ، 372 ، 396 ، 402 ، 406 ، 428 ، 470 ،
498 ، 586 ، 592 ، 668 تعنّت، متعنّت778 ، 784 عنف226 ، 244 ، 630 عناء202 ،
286 ، 428 ، 464 ، 720 عهد128 ، 194 ، 214 ، 322 ، 478 ، 496 ، 502 ، 524 ،
532 ، 548 ، 558 ، 612 ، 624 ، 630 ، 642 ، 644 ، 646 ، 662 ، 672
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com
04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1006 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic فرائض112 ، 382 ، 498 ، 624 ، 640
، 642 ، 706 ، 710 ، 764 ، 776 ، 798 ونوافل688 ، 768 فرط، إفراط، تفريط134
، 304 ، 306 ، 356 ، 508 ، 586 ، 620 ، 624 ، 662 ، 686 ، 694 ، 706 ، 714
، 730 ، 782 قارتفا ،ةقرُ ف296 ، 298 ، 306 ، 332 ، 384 ، 400 ، 404 ، 450 ،
452 ، 478 فزع402 ، 434 ، 470 ، 472 ، 502 ، 504 ، 758 فساد، مفسدة،
فاسد120 ، 154 ، 260 ، 310 ، 346 ، 402 ، 450 ، 456 ، 470 ، 490 ، 588 ،
706 ، 710 فسوق، فاسق270 ، 328 ، 444 ، 656 ، 686 فضل، تفضّل194 ، 196 ، 204
، 240 ، 242 ، 254 ، 266 ، 298 ، 326 ، 340 ، 354 ، 406 ، 416 ، 426 ، 434
، 442 ، 444 ، 448 ، 450 ، 464 ، 494 ، 508 ، 510 ، 546 ، 548 ، 550 ، 558
، 564 ، 572 ، 590 ، 602 ، 620 ، 628 ، 636 ، 644 ، 664 ، 712 ، 742 ، 784
، 816 ، 820 فضائل112 ، 324 ، 462 ، 564 فضيلة266 فقد106 ، 340 ، 366 ، 504
، 694 ، 766 تفقّد630 ، 634 ، 638 فقر278 ، 308 ، 428 ، 446 ، 450 ، 486 ،
512 ، 628 ، 678 ، 688 ، 692 ، 694 ، 708 ، 712 ، 726 ، 764 ، 778 ، 784 ،
814 فقير، فقراء238 ، 270 ، 308 ، 324 ، 362 ، 486 ، 522 ، 558 ، 712 ، 724
، 782 ، 794 ، 802 فقه، تفقّه380 ، 524 ، 574 ، 778 فقيه، فقهاء474 ، 700
فكر222 ، 228 ، 230 ، 234 ، 346 ، 360 ، 378 ، 420 ، 490 ، 506 ، 578 ، 678
، 688 ، 790 غالي116 ، 708 غمّ366 ، 434 ، 464 ، 498 ، 782 غنى270 ، 314 ،
348 ، 396 ، 428 ، 444 ، 446 ، 462 ، 582 ، 586 ، 590 ، 626 ، 630 ، 634 ،
686 ، 688 ، 692 ، 706 ، 716 ، 738 ، 784 ، 788 ، 814 غنيّ، أغنياء308 ، 450
، 460 ، 712 ، 724 ، 742 ، 782 ، 802 ، 808 استغناء782 إغاثة144 ، 164 ،
682 غيّ142 ، 302 ، 336 ، 396 ، 482 ، 540 ، 668 ، 808 غيب308 غِيبة270 ، 492
، 546 ، 718 ، 816 رويغ ،ةريَ غ594 ، 692 ، 712 ، 774 غيظ148 ، 270 ، 346 ،
450 ، 464 ، 498 ، 590 ، 664 ، 666 ، 706 ، 732 فتنة، فتن114 ، 116 ، 124 ،
132 ، 140 ، 172 ، 184 ، 194 ، 202 ، 210 ، 224 ، 242 ، 244 ، 246 ، 256 ،
258 ، 326 ، 338 ، 340 ، 342 ، 348 ، 352 ، 354 ، 372 ، 386 ، 414 ، 430 ،
432 ، 444 ، 516 ، 524 ، 532 ، 548 ، 576 ، 662 ، 666 ، 678 ، 700 ، 724 ،
770 ، 780 مفتون116 ، 156 ، 266 ، 680 ، 710 ، 816 فجور116 ، 270 ، 356 ،
586 فاجر164 ، 166 ، 492 ، 602 ، 648 ، 688 ، 704 فحش، فاحشة260 ، 464 ،
574 ، 588 فخر، مفاخرة124 ، 252 ، 346 ، 442 ، 450 ، 496 ، 502 ، 814
فراسة636 ، 670 فرصة588 ، 592 ، 614 ، 644 ، 790 إضاعة الـ710 انتهاز
الـ166 ، 190 ، 682 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة1007 تقصير234 ، 240 ، 398 ، 706 ، 786 ، 798 قطيعة548 ، 590 ،
592 ، 642 ، 670 قلب، قلوب. كثير الوقوع قناعة154 ، 446 ، 534 ، 692 ، 742
، 786 ، 792 ، 822 مقنوط170 قهر156 ، 342 ، 442 ، 452 استقامة396 قوّة172 ،
212 ، 216 ، 280 ، 382 ، 384 ، 446 ، 462 ، 476 ، 510 ، 634 ، 736 لا قوّة
إلّا بالله622 ، 646 ، 802 قيامة. كثير الوقوع كبر، تكبّر، استكبار، متكبّر210
، 258 ، 346 ، 360 ، 418 ، 440 ، 442 ، 444 ، 448 ، 450 ، 460 ، 464 ، 496
، 550 ، 560 ، 712 ، 746 ، 792 كبرياء246 ، 438 ، 466 ، 498 كذب130 ، 214 ،
222 ، 270 ، 312 ، 328 ، 332 ، 456 ، 486 ، 488 ، 574 ، 642 ، 666 ، 748 ،
816 كاذب، كذّاب، مكذّب218 ، 348 ، 354 ، 360 ، 438 ، 458 ، 460 ، 486 ، 510
، 526 ، 566 ، 598 ، 688 ، 748 ، 776 مكربة، مكروب210 ، 682 كرم204 ، 246 ،
322 ، 630 ، 674 ، 708 ، 746 كريم264 ، 416 ، 508 ، 602 ، 642 ، 692 ، 740
مكارم324 ، 450 ، 456 ، 748 اكتساب الإخوان680 كسل258 كظم، كظوم144 ، 216 ،
270 ، 450 ، 464 ، 498 ، 666 ، 790 كعبة، حليّ الـ764 كفاف690 ، 792 فكرة422
تفكّر، مفكّر208 ، 258 ، 344 ، 450 ، 578 ، 588 ، 710 ، 724 فهم، تفهّم264 ،
408 ، 576 ، 578 ، 632 ، 684 فناء170 ، 174 ، 202 ، 206 ، 208 ، 252 ، 282
، 286 ، 356 ، 378 ، 410 ، 418 ، 426 ، 428 ، 514 ، 552 ، 574 ، 584 ، 712
، 716 ، 790 ، 794 فوز184 ، 324 فاقة114 ، 206 ، 234 ، 238 ، 242 ، 396 ،
462 ، 508 ، 558 ، 582 ، 706 ، 790 ، 792 ، 800 قبلة114 ، 390 قتل، قاتل،
قتال. كثير الوقوع ق َ دَر، أقدار130 ، 230 ، 232 ، 370 ، 396 ، 564 ، 568 ،
648 ، 696 ، 734 ، 740 ، 768 ، 770 قدرة106 ، 108 ، 166 ، 228 ، 230 ، 272
، 332 ، 334 ، 342 ، 360 ، 374 ، 384 ، 412 ، 418 ، 420 ، 428 ، 466 ، 494
، 510 ، 626 ، 646 ، 666 ، 680 قدير242 ، 326 قرار194 ، 204 ، 314 ، 350 ،
364 ، 378 ، 386 ، 426 ، 434 ، 448 ، 452 ، 480 ، 490 ، 580 قرابة،
قرابات140 ، 298 ، 324 ، 456 ، 548 ، 566 ، 642 ، 702 ، 732 ، 738 ، 774
قربان476 ، 718 قرآن، كتاب الله. كثير الوقوع قاسطين456 قسوة548 قصاص400 ،
748 قصد132 ، 220 ، 246 ، 258 ، 294 ، 366 ، 430 ، 442 ، 462 ، 466 ، 470 ،
506 ، 564 ، 568 ، 578 ، 582 ، 592 ، 594 ، 718 اقتصاد462 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1008 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic ملول738 مملول768 ، 812 ملق786
ملائكة232 ، 272 ، 276 ، 396 ، 408 ، 440 ، 470 ، 480 ، 508 ، 532 ، 716
منّ، منّة، امتنان208 ، 338 ، 354 ، 364 ، 384 ، 406 ، 450 ، 466 ، 504 ، 644
، 738 منى، أمنيّة194 ، 210 ، 214 ، 254 ، 278 ، 540 ، 588 ، 686 ، 694 ،
738 موت، أموات. كثير الوقوع مائق770 مال، أموال. كثير الوقوع نبوّة، نبيّ،
أنبياء. كثير الوقوع نجاة، منجاة124 ، 156 ، 180 ، 198 ، 218 ، 244 ، 260 ،
264 ، 300 ، 352 ، 366 ، 506 ، 510 ، 580 ، 658 ، 720 ندم، ندامة110 ، 148
، 160 ، 178 ، 184 ، 274 ، 280 ، 298 ، 442 ، 476 ، 508 ، 716 ، 730 ، 806
نزاع، تنازع686 نزاهة464 نصح، نصيحة، تناصح158 ، 160 ، 184 ، 218 ، 246 ،
248 ، 262 ، 276 ، 284 ، 296 ، 316 ، 394 ، 466 ، 496 ، 572 ، 580 ، 588 ،
590 ، 602 ، 622 ، 630 ، 632 ، 636 ، 710 نصر، نصرة، انتصار116 ، 128 ، 142
، 152 ، 164 ، 178 ، 190 ، 208 ، 244 ، 252 ، 304 ، 316 ، 330 ، 380 ، 392
، 404 ، 416 ، 454 ، 472 ، 490 ، 568 ، 600 ، 622 ، 624 ، 656 ، 680 ، 758
، 762 ن َ صَفة، إنصاف، نصف138 ، 146 ، 318 ، 450 ، 622 ، 624 ، 626 ، 630 ،
638 ، 642 ، 704 ، 740 ، 742 كفر136 ، 180 ، 308 ، 396 ، 454 ، 460 ، 546 ،
572 ، 686 ، 712 كافر، كافرين136 ، 156 ، 200 ، 230 ، 538 ، 542 ، 736 ،
808 كفّارة، كفّارات476 ، 682 استكانة206 ، 446 لجاج، لجاجة، لَجج236 ، 468 ،
588 ، 614 ، 646 ، 728 ، 786 لذّة262 ، 514 ، 540 ، 560 ، 664 ، 712 ، 722 ،
800 لعب214 ، 312 ، 504 ، 512 ، 574 ، 696 لطف428 ، 496 ، 500 ، 510 ، 588
، 624 ، 630 ، 632 ، 748 لهو212 ، 504 ، 612 ، 670 ، 724 ، 792 لواط748
لوم460 ، 574 لئيم692 تلوّن120 ، 400 ، 466 لين290 ، 462 ، 464 ، 548 ، 588
، 590 ، 616 ، 664 ، 710 ، 782 أمثال112 ، 198 ، 204 ، 206 ، 398 ، 412 ،
452 ، 454 ، 580 ، 652 ، 720 تمحيص448 ، 450 ، 492 مارقة، مارقين198 ، 456
مروّة، مروّات682 ، 692 تماري686 مزحة814 مسكنة242 ، 450 ، 558 ، 630 مسكين،
مساكين452 ، 558 ، 606 ، 638 ، 774 ، 806 مقت282 ، 644 ، 778 ، 790 مكر298
، 464 ، 700 ، 796 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 فهرس المفاهيم الدينيّة
والأخلاقيّة1009 هدى، هداية132 ، 148 ، 218 ، 220 ، 224 ، 228 ، 244 ، 250 ،
260 ، 320 ، 328 ، 332 ، 396 ، 402 ، 406 ، 414 ، 464 ، 466 ، 474 ، 478 ،
492 ، 494 ، 498 ، 508 ، 516 ، 562 ، 568 ، 586 ، 656 ، 668 ، 738 ، 794
هادي204 ، 364 ، 382 ، 384 ، 396 ، 518 هرم208 ، 556 ، 720 هزل438 همّ،
هموم146 ، 218 ، 406 ، 464 ، 504 ، 538 ، 552 ، 572 ، 574 ، 578 ، 584 ،
592 ، 612 ، 632 ، 638 ، 642 ، 646 ، 664 ، 714 ، 720 ، 762 ، 782 ، 788 ،
790 ، 796 همّة، همم106 ، 234 ، 236 ، 246 ، 404 ، 522 ، 526 ، 692 ، 792 ،
816 هول206 ، 434 ، 686 هوان، استهانة278 ، 412 ، 558 ، 608 ، 684 ، 786 ،
798 تهاون454 هوى198 ، 210 ، 218 ، 220 ، 306 ، 320 ، 394 ، 400 ، 436 ،
482 ، 496 ، 532 ، 534 ، 536 ، 546 ، 576 ، 592 ، 626 ، 634 ، 646 ، 652 ،
674 ، 738 ، 770 هيبة234 ، 274 ، 490 ، 682 ، 740 ، 778 ثقة158 ، 286 ، 264
، 302 ، 400 ، 636 ، 638 ، 644 ، 740 توحيد106 ، 232 ، 242 ، 382 ، 422 ،
820 وحشة204 ، 272 ، 356 ، 428 ، 472 ، 504 ، 600 ، 688 ، 714 وحشيّة692
وحي108 ، 110 ، 194 ، 232 ، 260 ، 314 ، 326 ، 390 ، 458 ، 470 ، 716 نطق،
منطق122 ، 194 ، 240 ، 260 ، 270 ، 274 ، 322 ، 334 ، 336 ، 344 ، 408 ،
438 ، 462 ، 502 ، 504 ، 522 ، 526 ، 586 نعمة110 ، 114 ، 116 ، 170 ، 184
، 194 ، 266 ، 308 ، 320 ، 326 ، 328 ، 340 ، 392 ، 402 ، 420 ، 428 ، 430
، 450 ، 452 ، 454 ، 472 ، 496 ، 510 ، 532 ، 562 ، 564 ، 572 ، 584 ، 586
، 590 ، 620 ، 626 ، 644 ، 646 ، 666 ، 732 ، 740 ، 742 ، 746 ، 788 ، 798
نعم. كثير الوقوع نعيم216 ، 252 ، 286 ، 366 ، 428 ، 434 ، 454 ، 514 ، 550
، 742 ، 800 نفس، نفوس، أنفس. كثير الوقوع نفاق128 ، 396 ، 466 ، 698
منافق، منافقين116 ، 136 ، 398 ، 466 ، 486 ، 488 ، 522 ، 562 ، 686 ، 690
، 698 منكر134 ، 138 ، 202 ، 222 ، 310 ، 318 ، 328 ، 332 ، 358 ، 464 ،
494 ، 522 ، 574 ، 602 ، 794 ، 796 نهي عن الـ264 ، 310 ، 352 ، 454 ، 506
، 618 ، 686 ، 746 ، 796 ناكثين266 ، 334 ، 456 ، 572 نور، أنوار162 ، 194
، 224 ، 228 ، 232 ، 238 ، 240 ، 246 ، 264 ، 278 ، 350 ، 352 ، 358 ، 364
، 368 ، 370 ، 414 ، 432 ، 440 ، 448 ، 474 ، 490 ، 506 ، 574 ، 610 ، 644
، 720 ، 794 وظلمة280 ، 282 ، 408 ، 410 ، 414 ، 422 ، 474 ، 490 نار. كثير
الوقوع نيّة436 ، 576 ، 584 ، 640 صدق الـ122 ، 402 ، 690 هجرة180 ، 364 ،
432 ، 454 ، 524 ، 660 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 1010 index of
religious and ethical concepts, arabic تقوى، تقى130 ، 132 ، 146 ، 198 ،
204 ، 210 ، 278 ، 284 ، 312 ، 328 ، 356 ، 366 ، 390 ، 398 ، 410 ، 414 ،
430 ، 434 ، 436 ، 466 ، 468 ، 470 ، 472 ، 480 ، 518 ، 554 ، 558 ، 574 ،
578 ، 612 ، 616 ، 624 ، 702 ، 708 ، 714 ، 746 ، 792 ، 800 ، 802 تقيّ،
أتقياء، متّقين120 ، 166 ، 206 ، 208 ، 252 ، 278 ، 460 ، 462 ، 560 ، 596 ،
708 ، 718 ، 738 توكّل، اتّكال366 ، 556 ، 588 وَلاية116 ، 482 ، 492 ، 494
وليّ514 ، 556 ، 566 ، 702 أولياء الله146 ، 162 ، 224 ، 282 ، 310 ، 446 ،
516 ، 628 ، 654 ، 716 ، 722 ، 788 ، 804 ، 810 أولياء الشيطان172 وليّ
الدم، أولياء المقتول552 ، 644 إيمان، مؤمن، مؤمنين. كثير الوقوع وهن110 ،
258 ، 384 ، 544 ، 576 ، 594 ، 646 ونى، تواني236 ، 258 ، 744 يأس288 ، 454
، 466 ، 586 ، 592 ، 706 يتامى، أيتام604 ، 606 ، 616 يعسوب الدين
والمؤمنين752 ، 778 يقين110 ، 116 ، 138 ، 162 ، 218 ، 230 ، 232 ، 238 ،
284 ، 286 ، 342 ، 356 ، 402 ، 462 ، 546 ، 568 ، 574 ، 586 ، 592 ، 656 ،
684 ، 702 ، 712 ، 722 ، 766 ، 794 ودّ، مودّة، تودّد140 ، 270 ، 304 ، 336 ،
338 ، 678 ، 720 ، 738 ، 740 ، 774 وراثة، ميراث116 ، 304 ، 518 ، 606 ،
678 ، 692 ، 708 وارث، ورّاث، وارثين224 ، 312 ، 738 ، 784 ورع152 ، 202 ،
396 ، 610 ، 628 ، 678 ، 708 ، 786 ، 792 سعة الصدر728 صلة، تواصل512 ، 514
، 548 ، 588 ، 590 ، 592 ، 618 الرحم278 ، 322 ، 704 ، 746 وصيّ، أوصياء222
، 410 وصيّة110 ، 116 ، 188 ، 336 ، 542 ، 544 ، 552 ، 554 ، 572 ، 576 ،
578 ، 616 ، 674 تواضع، متواضع114 ، 232 ، 440 ، 442 ، 444 ، 448 ، 462 ،
550 ، 638 ، 710 ، 740 ، 802 وعظ، موعظة، عظة216 ، 246 ، 248 ، 262 ، 364 ،
398 ، 472 ، 510 ، 536 ، 574 ، 592 ، 684 ، 716 ، 724 768 وعد، عدة110 ،
112 ، 278 ، 282 ، 330 ، 360 ، 396 ، 434 ، 696 وعيد216 ، 434 ، 440 ، 454
، 696 توفيق104 ، 570 ، 578 ، 708 ، 738 ، 824 وفاء158 ، 166 ، 200 ، 450 ،
556 ، 634 ، 642 ، 644 ، 750 وقار، وقور464 ، 556 al-Sharīf al-Raḍī -
978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:47:41PM via
Open Access. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī - 978-90-04-68260-3 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:47:41PM via Open Access.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 Nahj al-Baliighah, the
celebrated compendium of orations, letters, and sayings of 'Ali: ibn Ab1
Talib ( d. 40/661) compiled by al-Sharif al-Rac;l1 ( d. 406/1015), is a
mas- terpiece of Arabic literature and Islamic wisdom studied and
memorized avidly and continually for over a thousand years. Showcasing
'All's life and travails in his own words, it also transcribes his
profound reflections on piety and virtue, and on just and compassionate
governance. Tahera Qutbuddin's meticulously researched critical edition
based on the earliest 5th/11th-century manuscripts, with a lucid,
annotated facing-page translation, brings to the modern reader the power
and beauty of this influential text, and confirms the aptness of
Rac;li:'s title, "The Way of Eloquence." Tahera Qutbuddin, Ph.D. (1999),
Harvard University, isAIBabtain Laudian Professor of Arabic at the
University of Oxford. Author of the award-winning Arabic Oration: Art
and Function (Brill, 2019 ), she has published widely on Islamic
preaching, Muhammad's hadith, Ali's sermons, Fa timid poetry, Tayyibi
Bohra literature, and Arabic in India. "'Below the speech of the Creator
but above the speech of created beings'-this is how commentator IbnAb\[
al-lf ad\[d ( d. ca. 1258)famously describedNahj al-Baliighah,
recognizing this collection as the pinnacle of eloquence in the Arabic
language. Tahera Qutbuddin presents in this volume a painstaking new
edition of this monument of Arabic literature, based on the oldest and
most reliable manuscripts and thorough consideration of the commentarial
tradition. Her brilliant translation is faithful to the original text,
precise, and elegant, capturing the force of pithy aphorisms, the
cadence of Arabic oratory, and contemplative reflection on the trials
and tribulations of human experience, the ethical quandaries of social
and political life, and the wonders of the natural world." - Devin\].
Stewart, Samuel Candler Dobbs Professor of Arabic and Middle Eastern
Studies, and Chair of the Department of Middle Eastern and South Asian
Studies, Emory University ISBN 978-90-04-68259-7 9 789004 682597 Islamic
Translation Series-15 ISSN 2666-3759 brill.com/its
