---
title: Sayings 815 3.415 If a man possesses one brilliant quality,
---
# Chapter 93: Sayings 815 3.415 If a man possesses one brilliant quality,
expect to see others. 3.416 ʿAlī said to Ghālib ibn Ṣaʿṣaʿah, Farazdaq's
father, during a longer conversation:1 What happened to your large herd
of camels? Ghālib replied, "The winds of duty have scattered them,
Commander of the Faithful," and ʿAlī responded: That is the most
admirable path they could have taken.2 3.417 If someone makes much ado
about small trials, God will afflict him with large ones. 3.418 The
self-respecting don't follow their passions. 3.419 Each time a man
spurts out a joke, he spits out a bit of his brain. 3.420 If you spurn a
person who wants you, you reduce your designated share. If you want a
person who spurns you, you humiliate yourself. 3.421 How, O son of Adam,
are you entitled to conceit? You began as a drop of semen and will end
as a rotting corpse. You cannot sustain your life, nor can you fight off
your death.3 3.422 Who is wealthy and who is poor will be known after
God's accounting. 3.423 Asked who was the best poet, ʿAlī replied: Poets
don't all race on the same track, so we can't speak about who reached
the goalpost first. But if you insist on an answer, I choose the
Wandering King. Raḍī: He meant Imruʾ al-Qays. 1 In Kufa, sometime during
ʿAlī's caliphate, 35--40/656--661 (Ḥ20:96). Farazdaq is the famous poet.
2 ms Y adds another saying here: "Whoever trades without knowing the law
becomes mired in usury." 3 Mubarrad, Kāmil, 2:11: Abū al-ʿAtāhiyah
(Dīwān, 178) paraphrased this saying in four verses: ما أحمق الإنسان في
فخره وهو غدًا في حفرة يقبر مـ ـا بـ ـال مـ ـن أوّلـ ـه نطفـ ـة وجيفــة
آخــره يفخــر أصبح لا يملك تقديـ ـم مـ ـا يرجو ولا تأخير مـ ـا يحـ ـذر
وأصبح الأمـ ـر إلـ ـى غيـ ـره في كلّ ما يقضى وما يقدر al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access
title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which
permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and
source are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
816 Text and Translation 3.424اّلإ نمث مكسفنأل سيل هّنإ اهلهأل ةظامُ ّللا
هذه عديٌّرُح الأ :مالسلا هيلع لاقو الجنّة فلا تبيعوها إلّا بها. 3.425وقال
عليه السلام: علامة الإيمان أن تؤثر الصدق حيث يضرّك على الـكذب حيث ينفعك
وألّا يكون في حديثك ف َ ضلٌ عن عملك وأن تتّقي الله في حديث غيرك.
3.426.ريبدتلا يف ةفآلا نوكت ىّتح ريدقتلا ىلع رادقِ ملا بلغي :مالسلا هيلع
لاقو وقد مضى هذا المعنى فيما تقدّم برواية تخالف بعض هذه الألفاظ.
3.427.ةّمهلاّولع امهجتنُ ي نامأوَ ت ةانألاو ملحلا :مالسلا هيلع لاقو
3.428وقال عليه السلام: الغيبة جهد العاجز. 3.429وقال عليه السلام: رُب .هيف
لوقلا نسحب نوتفم َ ّ al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera
Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access title distributed
under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and source
are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Chapter
3: Sayings 817 3.424 Is there no free man who will leave these chewed-up
scraps for the glut- tons? There is no price high enough for your souls
except paradise---don't sell them for anything less. 3.425 True belief
is this: to prefer a truth that hurts you over a falsehood that benefits
you, to ensure that your words don't outpace your deeds, and to fear God
when speaking about others. 3.426 The fates vanquish all---sometimes too
much planning can lead to pain. Raḍī: This saying was recorded earlier
with some variant words.1 3.427 Clemency and patience are twins born of
lofty aspirations.2 3.428 Slander is the enterprise of the weak. 3.429
Many are seduced by praise. 1 §3.12. 2 In praise of the Persian emperor
Anūshīrwān. Māmaṭīrī, Nuzhah, 380; Muwaffaq biʾllāh, Iʿtibār, 576.
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is
an open access title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
license, which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided no alterations are made and the
original author(s) and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ زيادة على الأصل١
3.430وقال عليه السلام: الدنيا خُلقت لغيرها ولم تخلق لنفسها. 3.431وقال
عليه السلام: إنّ لبني أميّة مِرْوَدًا يجرون فيه ولو قد ٱختلفوا فيما بينهم
ثمّكادتهم الضباع لغلبتهم. والمرود هنا مفعل من الإرواد وهو الإمهال
والإنظار وهذا من أفصح الكلام وأغربه فكأنّه عليه السلام شبّه المهلة التي هم
فيها بالمضمار ال ّ ذي يجرون فيه إلى الغاية فإذا بلغوا منقطعها ٱنتقض
نظامهم بعدها. 3.432ّ بَرُ ي امك مالسإلا اوَ ّبَر هللاو مه :راصنألا حدم يف
مالسلا هيلع لاقو ى الفُلوّمع غنائهم بأيديهم السِّباط وألسنتهم السِّلاط.
١أضيفتفيبعضالمخطوطاتقبلالخاتمةأوبعدهازيادةعلىالأصلقديمة،وهيعبارةعن سبع
عشرةكلمة لعليّ، مسبوقة في أقدم المخطوطات بسطر يشير الى أنها زائدة على
الأصل: ش: ⟩زيادةمننسخةكتبتفيعهدالمصنّف⟨)ملاحظةعنش:ثبتتالزياداتمن§١إلىوسط
§٤،حيثفقدتبعدهاصفحةمنالمخطوطة(.ن: ⟩زيادةكتبتمننسخةسريّةعراقيّة⟨.ي: ⟩زيادة
من نسخةكتبت على عهد المصنّف رحمه الله⟨. والزيادة لم تثبت في م، أو في شرح
ٱبن الفندق المؤل ّ ف سنة ٢٥٥ هجريّة وهو من أقدم الشروح. وأُثبتت الزيادة
بلا فاصلة أو تنبيه في أكثر المخطوطات التالية في الزمن، و كذلك في بعض
الشروح مثل شرح الراوندي ّ . والرضيّ كان قد ترك فراغات لإثبات زيادات في
نهايةكلّ من الأبواب الثلاثة للكتاب، وذ كر هذا الأمر في خاتمته للكتاب.
وقيل إن الزيادة التي بين أيدينا أُثبتت في حياة الرضيّ وبإمضائه: قال
ٱبنأبيالحديد ) ٠٢:٠٨١ (:
⟩ثمّوجدنانسخًاكثيرةفيهازياداتبعدهذاالكلامقيلإنّهاوجدت فينسخةكتبتفيحياةالرضيّ
رحمهاللهوقرئتعليهفأمضاهاوأذنفيإلحاقهابالكتابونحن نذ كرها⟨. وقال البحرانيّ
) ٩٢٠١ (: ⟩أقول إنّه رضوان الله عليه بلغ في ٱختيار كلامه عليه السلام إلى
هذه الغاية وقطعه عليها ثمّكتبت على عهده زيادة من محاسن الكلمات إمّا
بٱختياره هو أو
بعضمنكانيحضرهمنأهلالعلموتلكالزيادةتارةتوجدخارجةعنالمتنوتارةموضوعة
فيهملحقةبمنقطعٱختياره.ورويأنّهاقرئتعليهوأمربإلحاقهابالمتن⟨. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open
access title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license,
which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s)
and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Additional Sayings1
3.430 The world was created not for herself but for another. 3.431 The
Umayyads have a short stretch in which to race ahead. Once they quarrel,
the hyenas will strike. Raḍī: "Reprieve (mirwad)" is the mifʿal form
derived from the verbal noun irwād, which means "delay (imhāl)" and
"respite (inẓār)." This is among the most eloquent of usages and the
most wondrous. ʿAlī compared the reprieve they have been given to a
race- course in which they race toward the goal; once they reach it,
their government will collapse. 3.432 ʿAlī said in praise of the Allies:
By God, they nurtured Islam as one would a prize colt, with generous
hands and eloquent tongues. 1 An additional seventeen sayings---perhaps
added by Raḍī, or by others---are transcribed in some of our primary and
secondary manuscripts and commentaries (details in footnote to the
present edition, and in the Note on the Edition and Translation)
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603
Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is
an open access title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
license, which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided no alterations are made and the
original author(s) and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 820 Text and
Translation 3.433وقال عليه السلام: العين وِ .ِه َ ّسلاُءاك
وهذهمنالاستعاراتالعجيبةكأنّهشبّهالسهبالوعاءوالعينبالوكاءفإذاأطلقالوكاءلمينضبط
الوعاء وهذا القول في الأشهر الأظهر من كلام النبيّ صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
وقد رواه قوم لأمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وذ كر ذلك المبرّد في كتاب المقتضب
في باب اللفظ بالحروف وقد تكلّمنا على هذه الاستعارة في كتابنا الموسوم
بمجازات الآثار النبويّة. 3.434وقال عليه السلام في كلام له: ووليهم والٍ
فأقام وٱستقام حتّى ضرب الدين بجِرانه. 3.435وقال عليه السلام: يأتي على
الناس زمان عَضوض ي َ عَض ِ سوُ ملا ّ ر فيه على ما في يديه ولم ضَفْلااُوَسْنَ
تاَلَو﴿ هناحبسهللالاقكلذبرمؤي َ نْيَ ب َل ْ َ هْنَ ي.﴾ْمُك دفيهالأشراروي ُ ستذَلّ
فيهالأخيار َ يابُ يو ع المضطرّون وقد نهى رسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله
عن بيع المضطرّين. 3.436وقال عليه السلام: يَهل ِ بحُم نالجر َ ّيِف ك ّ مُطْرٍ
وباهِت ٌ مفترٍ. وهذا مثل قوله عليه السلام: هلك فيّ رجلان محب ّ غالٍ ومبغض
قالٍ. 3.437وسئل عليه السلام عن التوحيد والعدل فقال: التوحيد أن لا تتوهّمه
والعدل أن لا تتّهمه. 3.438وقال عليه السلام: إنّه لا خير في الصمت عن الح ُ
كم كما أنّه لا خير في القول بالجهل. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and
Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access title distributed
under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and source
are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Additional Sayings 821 3.433 The eye is a leather strap fastening the
buttocks. Raḍī: This is among the most wondrous of metaphors, as though
he likened the but- tocks to a vessel and the eye to a leather
strap---if the strap is loosened (i.e., if the eye is closed in sleep),
the vessel is not held fast (i.e., it can emit involuntary secretions).
In most narrations, this saying is attributed to the Prophet, but some
have attributed it to the Commander of the Faithful, such as Mubarrad,
in his Book of Extemporane- ous Discourse (Kitāb al-Muqtaḍab), in the
chapter on speech with single syllables. I
havealsodiscussedthismetaphorinmybook,FigurativeLanguageof
PropheticHadith (Majāzāt al-āthār al-nabawiyyah). 3.434 ʿAlī said in an
oration: Then a certain ruler came to rule them. He stood them upright
and he himself stayed upright, until religion, like a docile camel, laid
its neck flat on the earth. 3.435 A time like a gnashing camel will come
upon the people, when the rich will grip onto their wealth by their
teeth, even though they have been commanded other- wise, for God has
said, «Do not forget to be generous to one another».1 At this time, the
wicked will rise, while the virtuous will be humiliated, and the
helpless will be forced to sell their goods for a pittance, despite the
prohibition by God's Messenger. 3.436 Two kinds of men are damned
because of how they feel about me: one who praises too lavishly, and one
who slanders and lies. Raḍī: This is similar to his saying: Two kinds of
men are damned because of how they feel about me: one is excessive in
his love, the other is extreme in his hatred.2 3.437 ʿAlī was asked
about God's oneness and justice, and he replied: Declaring God's
onenessmeansnotimagininghim,anddeclaringhisjusticemeansneveraccusinghim.
3.438 There is no benefit in keeping silent when you can offer wisdom,
just as there is no benefit in speaking words of ignorance.3 1 Qurʾan,
Baqarah 2:237. 2 §3.107. 3 Similar to §3.166. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access
title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which
permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and
source are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
822 Text and Translation 3.439وقال عليه السلام في دعاء ٱستسقى به: اللّٰهمّ
ٱسقنا ذُل ُ ل السحائب دون صِعابها. وهذا من الكلام العجيب الفصاحة وذلك أنّه
عليه السلام شبّه السحائب ذوات الرعود والبوارق والرياح والصواعق بالإبل
الصعاب التي ت َ قمُص برحالها وتتوقّص بركبانها وشبّه السحاب الخالية من تلك
الروائع بالإبل الذلل التي تُحتل َ ب طَيِّعة وت ُ قتعَد مُسمِحة. 3.440وقيل له
عليه السلام: لو غيّرت شيبك يا أمير المؤمنين فقال: الخِضاب زينة ونحن قوم في
مصيبة. يريد برسول الله صل ّ ى الله عليه وآله. 3.441وقال عليه السلام:
القناعة مال لا ينفد. وقد روى بعضهم هذا الكلام عن النبيّصل ّ ى الله عليه
وآله. 3.442وقال عليه السلام لزياد بن أبيه وقد ٱستخلفه لعبد الله بن
العبّاس على فارس وأعمالها فيَ حلاوفسَعلارذحٱولدعلالمعتسا:جارخلام ُ
ّدقتنعهيفهاهنامهنيبناكليوطمالكيف .فيسلا ىلإ وعدي فيحلاو ءالَ جلاب دوعي
فسعلا ّنإف 3.443وقال عليه السلام: أشدّ الذنوب ما ٱستخف ّ به صاحبه.
3.444نأ ملعلا لهأ ىلع ذخأ ىّتح اومّ لعتي نأ لهجلا لهأ ىلع هللا ذخأ ام
:مالسلا هيلع لاقو .اومّ لعُ ي 3.445وقال عليه السلام: شرّالإخوان مَن ت ُ كُل
ِّف له. 3.446وقال عليه السلام: إذا ٱحتشم المؤمن أخاه فقد فارقه. al-Sharīf
al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded
from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open
access title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license,
which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s)
and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Additional Sayings
823 3.439 ʿAlī intoned in a prayer for rain: God, send us docile
rainclouds, not unruly ones that bolt. Raḍī: This is an amazingly
eloquent saying. He likened rainclouds that have thunder,
lightning,andhailwithunrulycamelsthathurloff theirsaddlesandthrowoff
theirrid- ers. He likened clouds that do not bring these frightening
phenomena to docile camels that are easy to milk and pleasant to ride.
3.440 Someone asked ʿAlī, Commander of the Faithful, why don't you dye
your white hair? (meaning in battle), and he replied: Dyeing your hair
is a form of adornment, and we are a people in mourning. Raḍī: He means
after the death of God's Messenger. 3.441 Contentment is wealth that
never runs out.1 Raḍī: Some people attribute this saying to the Prophet.
3.442 When ʿAlī replaced ʿAbdallāh ibn al-ʿAbbās with Ziyād ibn Abīhi as
governor of Fars and its environs, he had a lengthy conversation with
Ziyād in which he forbade
himfromcollectingthelandtaxbeforeitcamedue,andhewarned:Practicejusticeand
bewareviolenceormisappropriation,forviolenceleadstopeoplefleeingenmasse,and
misappropriation calls people to arms. 3.443 The worst sin is one its
perpetrator thinks insignificant.2 3.444 God has not required the
ignorant to learn without first requiring the learned to teach. 3.445
The worst friend is one in whose company you feel constrained. 3.446 If
a believer shames his brother, he has disowned him. 1 Identical to §3.50
and §3.332. 2 Similar to §3.331. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and
Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access title distributed
under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and source
are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 824
Text and Translation وهذا حين ٱنتهى الغاية بنا إلى قطع المختار من كلام
أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه حامدين لله سبحانه على ما مَنّ به من توفيقنا
لضمّ ما ٱنتشر من أطرافه وتقريب ما بعد من أقطاره ومقرّرين العزم كما شرطنا
أوّلًا على تفضيل أوراق من البياض في آخر كلّ
بابمنالأبوابليكونلٱقتناصالشاردوٱستلحاقالواردوماعساهأنيظهرلنابعد .ذوذ ُ
ّشلا دعب انيلإ عقيو ضومغلا وما توفيقنا إلّا بالله عليه توكّلنا وهو حسبنا
ونعم الوكيل وذلك في رجب من سنة أربعمائة.١ ١ن: كذا. م: كذا، وسقط التاريخ.
ي: كذا، وأضيفت ⟩والحمد لله وصلواته على رسوله محمّد وآله الطاهرين⟨. ش:
فقدت صفحة تشمل بداية الخاتمة، وثبتت في الصفحة التالية: ⟩ويقع إلينا
الشذوذ ...أربعمائة⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera
Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access title distributed
under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and source
are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Additional Sayings 825 Raḍī's Conclusion Icomeheretotheendof
myselectionfromthewordsof theCommanderof the Faithful. I praise Almighty
God who, by his immense grace, has guided me to gather from these words
what was scattered here and there, and to collect what
wasdispersedfarandwide.Ihavecarriedoutmyresolve---asIhadstatedinthe
beginning---to leave blank pages at the end of each chapter, so that I
may cap- ture therein any strays and add any additional discoveries,
including anything that becomes clear to me after having been obscure or
falls into my hands after being out of sight. I seek my direction from
God. In him I place my trust. He is my refuge, and he is the best
trustee. I write this in the month of Rajab, in the year four hundred
\[1010ad\]. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin -
9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open
Access. This is an open access title distributed under the terms of the
CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any non-commercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided no alterations
are made and the original author(s) and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
