---
title: Orations 321 Shouting "the oath! the oath!" you crowded
---
# Chapter 26: Orations 321 Shouting "the oath! the oath!" you crowded
around me like camel mares snug- gling their newborn calves. I closed my
palm shut, but you forced it open. I snatched my hand away, but you
pulled it toward you. I beseech you, O God:
ṬalḥahandZubayrhaveseveredmytiesof kinship,theyhavewrongedme,they have
broken their pledge of allegiance, and incited people to march against
me. Undo the knots they have tied, unravel the ropes they have twisted,
and show them the opposite of what they wish and strive for! Before
beginning the fight, I asked them to return to their pledge; before
commencing battle, I gave them a second chance; but they have scorned my
kindness and rejected my offer of safety. 1.136 From an oration by ʿAlī
containing narratives of epic battles:1 1.136.1 He will bend passion to
conform to guidance, where others have bent guidance to conform to
passion. He will bend caprice to conform to the Qurʾan, where others
have bent the Qurʾan to conform to caprice. 1.136.2 From the same
oration: War will stand fierce among you, baring its teeth, with full
udders that are sweet to suckle but leave a bitter aftertaste of gourd.2
Be wary of the morrow which will bring you the unknown. A new sovereign
will arrive who will punish governors for their injustice. The earth
will reveal to him her inner treasures,3 and offer him submissively the
keys to her fortress. He will make you walk the path of justice and
resurrect what you have killed of the Book and the Sun- nah. 1.136.3
From the same oration, about an unjust ruler:4 1 Part of ʿAlī's oration
in Basra a few days after the Battle of the Camel in 36/656 (Ṭabrisī,
Iḥti- jāj, 1:289--290). The commentators state that the reference in
§1.136.1 and §1.136.2 is to the Messiah, who will come at the end of
time. Ḥ9:40; B 484, R 2:62. 2 The Arabic sentence begins with ḥattā
("until"), connecting to the previous part of the text which is not
transcribed. 3 Lit. "The earth will reveal the pieces of its liver
(afālīdh kabidihā)." Translation after Ḥ9:46; B 485; R 2:62. 4 The
commentators state that this prophecy refers to the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd
al-Malik (r. 65-- 86/685--705) (Ḥ9:47; B 486), or---unlikely, I think,
because of the more immediate context of the lines following---to "a
rebel toward the end of time like Sufyānī" (R 2:63), and also because
the first few lines are similar to §1.98.3, which also, according to
them, refers to ʿAbd al-Malik. Based on the context, I have added the
phrase, "about an unjust ruler," to differentiate the paragraph from the
one before. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin -
9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open
Access. This is an open access title distributed under the terms of the
CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any non-commercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided no alterations
are made and the original author(s) and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 322 Text and
Translation كأن ّ يبهقدن َ سورَ
ّضلافطعاهيلعفطعفنافوكيحاوَضيفهتاياربصحفوماشلاب َقَع وفرشالأرضبالرؤوسقدف َ
غَرتفاغرتهوثقلتفيالأرضوطأتهبعيدَالجولةعظيم ُ يَ ل هللاو ةلوصلا ش َ يف
لحكـلاك ليلق اّلإ مكنم ىقبي ال ىّتح ضرألا فارطأ يف مكَ ّنَدِّر العين فلا
تزالون كذلك حتّى تؤوب إلى العرب عوازب أحلامها فٱلزموا السنن القائمة
والآثار البيّنة والعهد القريب الذي عليه باقي النبوّة وٱعلموا أنّ الشيطان
إنّما ي ُ سَنّي لـكم طرقه لتتّبعوا عقبه. 1.137ومن كلام له عليه السلام في وقت
الشورى لن يسرع أحد قبلي إلى دعوة حقّ وصلة رحم وعائدةكرم فٱسمعوا قولي وَعُوا
منطقي ىّتح دوهعلا هيف ناخُتو فويسلا هيف ىضتنُ ت مويلا اذه دعب نم رمألا اذه
اورت نأ ىسع يكون بعضكم أئمّة لأهل الضلالة وشيعة لأهل الجهالة. 1.138ومن
كلام له عليه السلام في النهي عن عيب١ الناس فإنّما ينبغي لأهل العصمة
والمصنوع إليهم في السلامة أن يرحموا أهل الذنوب والمعصية ويكون الشكر هو
الغالب عليهم والحاجز لهم عنهم. فكيف بالعائب الذي عاب أخاه وعيّره ببلواه
أما ذ كر موضع ستر الله عليه من ذنوبه ما هو أعظم من الذنب الذي عاب َ ه به
وكيف يذمّه بذنب قد ركب مثله فإن لم يكن ركب ذلك الذنب بعينه فقد عصى الله
فيما سواه ممّا هو أعظم منه وٱيم الله لئن لم يكن عصاه في الـكبير وعصاه في
الصغير ُ تَأْرُ جَل هعلىعيبالناسأكبرياعبداللهلاتعجلفيعيبعبد٢بذنبهفلعل ّ
همغفورلهولا تأمن على نفسك صغير معصية فلعلّك معذّب عليه فليكفف مَن علم منكم
عيب غيره لما يعلم من عيب نفسه. وليكن الشكر شاغل ً ا له على معافاته ممّا
ٱبتلي به غيره. ١م، ي، ومصحّحة في ش، ھ: كذا. ن، وأصل ش، ھ: ⟩غِيبة⟨. ٢م، ي،
ومصحّحة في ھ: كذا.ن،ش،وأصلھ: ⟩أحد⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and
Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024
04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access title distributed
under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and source
are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Chapter
1: Orations 323 I can almost see him now as he calls to his flock in
Syria and scrapes the ground for his banners to roost in the hinterlands
of Kufa. Like an ill-tempered camel mare, he snaps and nips at your
townspeople. He carpets its earth with decap- itated heads. His jaws
wide open, he stamps violently, he ranges far, and his onslaughts are
brutal. By God, he will scatter you to the ends of the earth until few
remain, as specks of kohl in the eye. You will continue thus until the
Arabs' long-departed reason returns home. During that difficult time,
hold fast to
establishedpracticesandcleartraces.Looktoyourrecenterathatwasstamped by
the Prophet's mark.1 Know that Satan smooths his pathways to lure you
into treading in his steps. 1.137 From an address by ʿAlī during the
Shūrā Council:2 No one will outpace me in calling to the truth,
fostering kinship, or acting with kindness, so listen to my words and
pay attention to what I say. You will see swords drawn over this matter
after today, and pledges broken; some of you will become leaders of the
errant, others, followers of reckless fools. 1.138 From an address by
ʿAlī in which he forbade his followers from exposing people's sins: It
befits those who are protected by good character and blessed with sound
judgment to show compassion to sinners and transgressors. Gratitude
should be their dominant trait, and it should stop them from pointing
fingers. Doesn't the faultfinder who censures his brother and shames him
for his trials remem- ber the times when God concealed his own sins,
sins that were far graver than the ones he censures his brother for? How
can he condemn his brother for a sin he himself has also committed? Even
if he has not committed the exact same crime, he has still disobeyed God
in other things, some of which were perhaps more severe. By God, even if
he has committed no mortal sin, even if has transgressed only in minor
ways, his insolence in shaming others is worse than anything else. O
servant of God, don't rush to expose your fellow man's offence,
perchance God may have forgiven it! Don't think your small transgres-
sion trivial, perchance God may punish you for it! Any man who
recognizes that he too has committed shameful acts should refrain from
shaming another. Thanksgiving for being spared the other man's trials
should give him occupa- tion enough. 1 Refers to ʿAlī's own caliphate.
Ḥ9:48. 2 In Medina, 23/644. Ṭabarī, Tārīkh, 4:236; Ḥ9:49--58; details of
Shūrā Council that appointed ʿUthmān in both. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access
title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which
permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and
source are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
324 Text and Translation 1.139ومن كلام له عليه السلام أيّها الناس من عرف
من أخيه وثيقة دين وسداد طريق فلا يسمعنّ فيه أقاويل الرجال١ أما إنّه قد
يرمي الرامي وتخطئ السهام ويَحيكُ الكلام وباطل ذلك يبور والله سميع وشهيد
أما إنّه ليس بين الحقّ والباطل إلّا أربع أصابع. فسئل عليه السلام عن معنى
قوله هذا فجمع أصابعه ووضعها بين أذنه وعينه ثمّقال الباطل أن تقول سمعت
والحقّ أن تقول رأيت. 1.140ومن كلام له عليه السلام وليس لواضع المعروف في
غير حقّه وعند غير أهله من الحظ ّ فيما أتى إلّا محمدة اللئام وثناء الأشرار
ومقالة الجهّال ما دام منعمًا عليهم ما أجود يده وهو عن ذات الله بخيل
فمنآتاهاللهمالًافليصلبهالقرابةوليحسنمنهالضيافةوليفكّ بهالأسيروالعانيوليعط
منه الفقير والغارم وليصبر نفسه على الحقوق والنوائب ٱبتغاء الثواب فإنّ
فوزًا بهذه الخصال شرف مكارم الدنيا ودرك فضائل الآخرة.٢ 1.141ومن خطبة له
عليه السلام في الاستسقاء 1.141.1ألا وإنّ الأرض التي تحملـكم والسماء التي
تظلـّكم مطيعتان لربّكم وما أصبحتا تجودان لـكم ببركتهما توجّعًا لـكم ولا زلفة
إليكم ولا لخـير ترجوان ِ ه منكم ولـكن أُمرتا بمنافعكم فأطاعتا وأقيمتا على
حدود مصالحكم فقامتا إنّ الله يبتلي عباده عند الأعمال
١م،ي،ومصحّحةفيش،ھ:كذا.ن،وأصلش،ھ: ⟩الناس⟨. ٢م،ن،ي،ھ،ومصحّحة
فيش:كذا.أصلش،وزيادةفيم:أضيفت ⟩إنشاءالله⟨. al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access
title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which
permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and
source are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/