---
title: Orations 177 angels---all this would be little compared with
---
# Chapter 8: Orations 177 angels---all this would be little compared with
the reward I hope for you and the punishment I fear. By God, if your
hearts were to dissolve like salt, if your eyes shed blood in fear and
hope, and if you were permitted to live in this world for as long as it
continues to exist, your deeds---even with supreme toil and
labor---would not repay God's immense favors, or his guidance of you to
faith. 1.52.3 From the same oration, referring to the Eid of Sacrifice,
and describing the requirements of a sacrificial animal: The sacrificial
animal is considered intact if its ears are whole and its eyes are
sound.1 If the ears and eyes are sound, then the sacrificial animal is
considered sound and intact. This is true even if a horn is broken and
the animal drags its foot to the slaughterhouse. 1.53 From an address by
ʿAlī:2 They crowded me like parched camels jostling at the waterhole
when the herder unfastens their hobbling ropes and sets them loose. I
feared they would crush me or each other to death.3
Ihaveturnedoverthismatterinmymindthroughmanysleeplessnightsand concluded
that I can either fight the rebels or repudiate Muḥammad's religion, and
braving war with men sits lighter on me than braving God's punishment,
facing death in this world sits lighter on me than facing death in
eternity. 1.54 From ʿAlī's address to his troops at Ṣiffīn when they
expressed impatience at his reluctance to commence battle:4 1 Lit. "if
its ears stand up" (istishrāf udhunihā), denoting an animal whose ears
are neither slit nor defective. B 271. 2 Referring to the Medinans'
pledge of allegiance to ʿAlī as caliph, after ʿUthmān's death, and to
the breaking of that pledge, either by Ṭalḥah and Zubayr (Ḥ4:6--11), or
by Muʿāwiyah and the Syrians (R 1:275; B 272--273), or by both groups
(Gh 1:297--298). Rāwandī and Baḥrānī add that ʿAlī refers here also to
his initial delay in granting his army permission to fight the Syrians,
explicitly mentioned next in §1.54. Ibn Qutaybah (Imāmah, 1:174) and Ibn
Ṭāwūs (Kashf, 174, 180) cite it as part of a lengthy epistle ʿAlī wrote
after Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr's killing in 38/658. They include §1.30 in
this epistle; see more details in note there. 3 Similar lines in §1.3.4,
§1.135.2, §1.226. 4 37/657. Details of ʿAlī's efforts at reconciliation
in Ḥ4:13--32. Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih (ʿIqd, 1:95) and Māmaṭīrī (Nuzhah, 376)
narrate the line (By God, I care not ... confront me!) as a response to
associates who warned him, saying, "Do you fight the Syrians in the
morning, then come out in the evening wearing only a waist-cloth and
cloak?" al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin -
9789004682603 Downloaded from Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open
Access. This is an open access title distributed under the terms of the
CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which permits any non-commercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided no alterations
are made and the original author(s) and source are credited.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 178 Text and
Translation أمّاقولـكمأكلّ
ذلككراهيةالموتفواللهماأباليدخلتإلىالموتأوخرجالموتإليّ يب قحلت نأ عمطأ
انأو اّلإ اًموي برحلا تعفد ام هللاوف ماشلا لهأ يف ا ً ّكش مكـلوق اّمأو
طائفة فتهتدي بي وتعشو إلى ضوئي أحب ّ إليّمن أن أقتلها على ضلالها وإن كانت
تبوء بآثامها. 1.55ومن كلام له عليه السلام ّ لص هللا لوسر عم اّ نك دقلو ى
الله عليه وآله نقتل آباءنا وأبناءنا وإخواننا وأعمامنا ما يزيدنا
ّودعلاداهجىلعا ً ّدجوملألاضَضَمىلعاًربصومَقَ ّللاىلعاً
ّيضمواًميلستواًناميإاّلإكلذ ولقد كان الرجل منّا والآخر من عدوّنا يتصاولان
تصاول الفحلين يتخالسان أنفسهما أيّهما يسقي صاحبهكأس المنون فمرّة لنا من
عدوّنا ومرّة لعدوّنا منّا فلمّا رأى الله صدقنا .هناطوأاً ئّوبتموهنارجاً
يقلممالسإلاّرقتسٱىّتحرصنلاانيلعلزنأوتبكـلاانّودعبلزنأ اهّنُ بلتحتل هللا ميٱو
دوع ناميإللّرضخٱ الو دومع نيدلل ماق ام متيتأ ام يتأن اّ نك ول يرمعلو دمًا
ولتتبعُنّها ندمًا. 1.56ومن كلام له عليه السلام لأصحابه al-Sharīf al-Raḍī
(d. 406/1015) and Tahera Qutbuddin - 9789004682603 Downloaded from
Brill.com 04/18/2024 04:50:51PM via Open Access. This is an open access
title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which
permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided no alterations are made and the original author(s) and
source are credited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/